animals
Review
Metabolism, Ketosis Treatment and Milk Production
after Using Glycerol in Dairy Cows: A Review
Robert Kupczy´nski 1,*
, Antoni Szumny 2
, Katarzyna Wujcikowska 1 and Natalia Pachura 2
1
Department of Environment, Animal Hygiene and Welfare, Wrocław University of Environmental and Life
Sciences, Chełmo´nskiego 38C, 50-375 Wrocław, Poland; k.wujcikowska@gmail.com
2
Department of Chemistry, Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life Science, Norwida 25,
50-375 Wrocław, Poland; antoni.szumny@upwr.edu.pl (A.S.); natalia.pachura@upwr.edu.pl (N.P.)
*
Correspondence: robert.kupczynski@upwr.edu.pl; Tel.: +48-713-205-941
Received: 3 June 2020; Accepted: 5 August 2020; Published: 8 August 2020


Simple Summary: Glycerol, as well as being an attractive feed ingredient for cattle, is also a
by-product of a wide range of industrial applications. Glycerol has potential value in farming since it
improves metabolism, feed eﬃciency, and can alleviate the symptoms of ketosis. Data indicate that
glycerol can be a suitable partial grain replacement in the diet of cows during the transition period
and at the beginning of lactation. The impact on milk yield is not signiﬁcant, but glycerol mostly
decreases milk fat content. The inclusion of dietary glycerol in the ration of dairy cows has an aﬀect
on ruminal fermentation patterns. Glycerol is rapidly fermented in the rumen into propionate, and it
is metabolized to glucose in the liver through the process of glycogenolysis. Additionally, glycerol
administration to ruminants can reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The purpose of this review is to
highlight the potential beneﬁts and drawbacks related to the use of glycerol in cattle.
Abstract: The aim of this paper is to review and systematize the current state of knowledge on glycol
metabolism in cattle. Glycerol, derived from biodiesel production, must be puriﬁed in order to be a
useful product for feeding livestock. The use of glycerol in the feeding of ruminants can be justiﬁed for
several reasons: (i) it is a source of energy in the ration, (ii) it is a glucogenic precursor, and (iii) it may
have an eﬀect on milk composition. The high energy value of glycerol provides the opportunity to use
this raw material as a partial grain substitute in cattle feed rations. Dietary supplementation of glycerol
is associated with increased propionate, butyrate, valerate, and isovalerate concentrations in the
rumen. Glycerol can be used at up to 10%–15% of the die