Critical Review
Gluconeogenesis in Dairy Cows: The Secret of Making Sweet Milk
from Sour Dough
Jo¨rg R. Aschenbach1, Niels B. Kristensen2, Shawn S. Donkin3, Harald M. Hammon4, and
Gregory B. Penner5
1Department of Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Veterinary Physiology, Free University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany
2Department of Animal Health and Bioscience, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, Aarhus University, Tjele, Denmark
3Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
4Research Unit Nutritional Physiology, Leibniz Institute for Farm Animal Biology (FBN), Dummerstorf, Germany
5Department of Animal and Poultry Science, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
Summary
Gluconeogenesis is a crucial process to support glucose homeo-
stasis when nutritional supply with glucose is insufﬁcient. Because
ingested carbohydrates are efﬁciently fermented to short-chain
fatty acids in the rumen, ruminants are required to meet the larg-
est part of their glucose demand by de novo genesis after weaning.
The qualitative difference to nonruminant species is that propio-
nate originating from ruminal metabolism is the major substrate
for gluconeogenesis. Disposal of propionate into gluconeogenesis
via propionyl-CoA carboxylase, methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, and
the
cytosolic
form
of
phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase
(PEPCK) has a high metabolic priority and continues even if glu-
cose is exogenously supplied. Gluconeogenesis is regulated at the
transcriptional and several posttranscriptional levels and is under
hormonal control (primarily insulin, glucagon, and growth hor-
mone). Transcriptional regulation is relevant for regulating pre-
cursor entry into gluconeogenesis (propionate, alanine and other
amino acids, lactate, and glycerol). Promoters of the bovine pyru-
vate carboxylase (PC) and PEPCK genes are directly controlled
by metabolic products. The ﬁnal steps decisive for glucose release
(fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase and glucose 6-phosphatase) appear to
be highly dependent on posttranscriptional regulation according to
actual glucose status. Glucogenic precursor entry, together with
hepatic glycogen dynamics, is mostly sufﬁcient to meet the needs
for hepatic glucose output except in high-producing dairy cows
during the transition from the dry period to peak lactation. Lac-
tating cows adapt to the increased glucose requirement for lactose
production by mobilization of endogenous glucogenic substrates
and increased hepatic PC express