ABSTRACT
Adipose tissue (AT) is a central reservoir of energy 
stored in the form of lipids. In addition, AT has been 
recognized as an immunologically and endocrinologi-
cally active tissue of dairy cattle. The recent litera-
ture on AT biology of transition dairy cows has often 
focused on the possible negative effects that originate 
from excessive body fat. However, the highly efficient 
energy-storage capability of this tissue is also vital to 
the adaptability of dairy cattle to the change in nutri-
ent availability, and to support lactation and reproduc-
tion. An excessive degree of mobilization of this tissue, 
however, is associated with high circulating fatty acid 
concentrations, and this may have direct and indirect 
negative effects on reproductive health, productivity, 
and disease risk. Furthermore, rapid lipolysis may be 
associated with postpartum inflammation. Research on 
the role of AT is complicated by the greater difficulty 
of accessing and measuring visceral AT compared with 
subcutaneous AT. The objective of this review is to 
provide a transition cow–centric summary of AT biol-
ogy with a focus on reviewing methods of measuring 
AT mass as well as to describe the importance for pro-
duction, health, and reproductive success.
Key words: adipose tissue, body condition, transition 
period, health
INTRODUCTION
Adipose tissue (AT), specifically white AT, is the 
major energy reserve in the form of triacylglycerol 
(TAG; an ester of glycerol and 3 fatty acids) in mam-
mals (Ahmadian et al., 2010). When energy intake is 
in excess of maintenance and other needs, AT accre-
tion occurs. Brown adipose tissue serves primarily as a 
source of heat and, in contrast to humans (Cohen and 
Spiegelman, 2016), has not been detected in cattle be-
yond the neonatal period (Smith and Carstens, 2005). 
Uncertainty exists if this is due to the lack of advanced 
methods such as positron emission tomography or 
computed tomography phenotyping and other imaging 
app