animals
Review
Monitoring and Improving the Metabolic Health of Dairy Cows
during the Transition Period
Luciano S. Caixeta1,*and Bobwealth O. Omontese2
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Caixeta, L.S.; Omontese,
B.O. Monitoring and Improving the
Metabolic Health of Dairy Cows
during the Transition Period. Animals
2021 ,11, 352. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ani11020352
Academic Editor: David S. Beggs
Received: 30 November 2020
Accepted: 27 January 2021
Published: 31 January 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota,
Saint Paul, MN 55108, USA
2Department of Food and Animal Sciences, College of Agricultural, Life and Natural Sciences,
Alabama A&M University, Normal, AL 35811, USA; bobwealth.omontese@aamu.edu
*Correspondence: lcaixeta@umn.edu; Tel.: +1-612-625-3130
Simple Summary: The transition from late gestation to early lactation is a challenging period for
dairy cows. A successful transition period depends on metabolic adaptation to the new physiological
state in early lactation and proper management in order to support the cow’s requirements. This
review paper will discuss various aspects of routine and consistent approaches to collect and analyze
herd records, to detect unintended disruptions in performance. In addition, we discuss how to
incorporate methods to assess health, production, nutrition, and welfare information to monitor cows
during the transition period. Lastly, we discuss management strategies that can be implemented to
improve the metabolic health and performance of transition dairy cows.
Abstract: The peripartum period of a dairy cow is characterized by several physiological and
behavioral changes in response to a rapid increase in nutrient demands, to support the ﬁnal stages
of fetal growth and the production of colostrum and milk. Traditionally, the transition period is
deﬁned as the period 3 weeks before and 3 weeks after parturition. However, several researchers
have argued that the transition period begins at the time of dry-off (~60–50 days prior to calving)
and extends beyond the ﬁrst month post-calving in high producing dairy cows. Independent of the
deﬁnition used, adequate adaptation to the physiological demands of this period is paramount for a
successful lactation. Nonetheless, not all cows are successful in transitioning from late gestation to
early lactation, leading to approximately one third of dairy cows having at least one clinical disease
(metabolic and/or infectious) and more than half of the cows having at least one subclinical case
of disease within the ﬁrst 90 days of lactation. Thus, monitoring dairy cows during this period is
essential to detect early disease signs, diagnose clinical and subclinical diseases, and initiate targeted
health management to avoid health and production impairment. In this review, we discuss different
strategies to monitor dairy cows to detected unintended disruptions in performance and management
strategies that can be implemented to improve the metabolic health and performance of dairy cows
during the transition period.
Keywords: dairy cow management; dairy nutrition; hyperketonemia; hypocalcemia; performance;
early lactation
1. Introduction
The transition period has traditionally been deﬁned as the period 3 weeks before and
3 weeks after parturition [ 1]. Nevertheless, metabolic changes can start earlier during
the dry period and have long-term carryover effects post-calving. More importantly, an
efﬁcient transition into lactation is essential to ensure the success of dairy cows in current
production systems [ 2]. Despite this, ineffective adaptation to the new physiological
state remains common. The transition from late gestation to early lactation is the most
challenging period for the dairy cow because of the rapid increase in nutrient demands to
Animals 2021 ,11, 352. https://doi.org/10.3390/ani11020352 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/animals
Animals 2021 ,11, 352 2 of 17
support fetal growth and colostrum and milk production [ 3,4]. In early lactation, energy
demands increase by about 300%, and calcium requirements are increased more than 65%
to support lactogenesis [ 2–5]. At the same time, voluntary feed intake decreases to a level
that is insufﬁcient to cover the nutrient requirements of the cow, leading to a period of
deﬁcit in terms of both energy and major minerals [ 6]. Thus, homeorhetic and homeostatic
adaptations are essential to coordinate the mobilization of lipid and mineral reserves during
the transition period [ 7]. The pursuit of a more efﬁcient production system has led the
dairy industry to prioritize selection for milk yield over other traits, exacerbating those
metabolic problems faced by dairy cows [ 8,9]. Therefore, dairy cows are at the greatest risk
of developing disease(s) and involuntary culling during the periparturient period [ 10–13].
The routine and systematic collection and evaluation of information collected on-farm
can identify deviations from expected performance. Thus, monitoring can be used to detect
unintended disruptions in performance under the existing management conditions or to
measure the impact of an implemented intervention or change in management. When used
correctly, monitoring methods are extremely important to support management decisions
and can help motivate management or employee behavioral change on a dairy farm [ 14].
Many approaches exist to monitor the transition dairy cow, and these approaches vary
depending on the general goals of the farm. Therefore, choosing monitoring methods that
are practical and useful to address the problem(s) at hand is important.
The ideal monitoring methods, independent of the problems at hand, must: (1) have a
minimum delay between causes and effect (lag); (2) not mask recent changes when using
historical data (momentum); (3) detect differences across the population (variation); and (4)
not contain misleading information (bias) [ 14]. Unfortunately, it is not possible to achieve
all these features using a single monitor, and a combination of monitoring methods is
often used to analyze the performance of transition dairy cows. In order to monitor the
transition period, the following broad areas can be used as a guideline: dairy herd general
information (e.g., stocking density, cow comfort, body condition scoring), milk production
during early lactation, fresh cow health, and events (e.g., disease incidence and prevalence,
death, and culling), and feeds and feeding (i.e., feeding management).
Considering the multifactorial nature of the pathogenesis of transition period diseases
and the delays in diagnosis and recording, herd-level monitoring and prevention strategies
relying solely on the occurrence of a single disease as a standalone morbidity are practically
impossible and are of little signiﬁcance to veterinarians, consultants, and dairy produc-
ers [ 15]. Thus, carefully monitoring the transition dairy cow while considering all factors
affecting health and performance enables prompt intervention to address rising problems
and enhances cow health, well-being, and productivity in a timely manner.
Considering the importance of the transition period for the success of dairy cows in
intensive systems, this review article aims to describe the adaptations occurring during the
periparturient period and highlight strategies to improve cow performance and welfare
during the transition period. In addition, we aim to summarize management and treatment
strategies to prevent the occurrence of metabolic diseases, potentially decreasing the
economic cost of these diseases and improving cattle welfare.
2. Monitoring the Transition Dairy Cow
2.1. Dairy Herd General Information
Appropriate stocking density—dependent on breed, parity, and lactation stage or dry
period—is important to prevent negative effects on health and milk production in early
lactation. The stocking density during the far-off period should not exceed 100% of the
total number of stall beds in free-stall housing systems. On the other hand, during the
close-up period, ideal stocking density varies according to breed. In a ﬁeld trial evaluating
dry-cow feed additives, Holstein primiparous cows produced 0.72 kg per day less milk for
every 10% unit increase in stocking densities (based on headlocks) above 80% during the
close-up period [ 16]. Alternatively, 100% stocking density (based on headlocks) was not
detrimental in Jersey cattle. When comparing 80% versus 100% stocking densities, Silva
Animals 2021 ,11, 352 3 of 17
and colleagues [ 17] reported no difference in the percentages of Jersey cows developing
diseases (48% vs. 45%, for 80% and 100% stocking densities, respectively) or being removed
from the herd before 60 days in milk (8% for both groups). Non-signiﬁcant differences were
also reported when investigating the innate immune response, body condition score (BCS),
milk production, and reproductive performance [ 17]. Animals in the 80% stocking density
group, however, spent more time lying down near to parturition and were displaced from
the feed bunk less often than cows in the 100% stocking density group [ 18]. Interestingly,
cows in the higher stocking density group were less likely to start feeding within 5 min of
feed delivery when compared to the cows in low stocking density pens [ 19]. In addition
to behavioral changes, an increase in stocking density (9.7 m2versus 19.3 m2per cow)
in the prepartum period was associated with lower hygiene scores [ 20]. Considering the
published literature to date, there is enough evidence to advise against overstocking dairy
cows during the transition period.
In addition to appropriate stocking density, adequate heat abatement and comfortable,
clean, dry, and appropriately designed stalls are essential to minimize stress during the
transition period. Adequate heat abatement during the dry period and after calving is
important to minimize the effects of heat stress on milk production, reproductive perfor-
mance, and the health of dairy cows [ 21–23]. For example, actively cooled nulliparous and
multiparous cows produce an extra 4 kg/d and 9 kg/d of milk, respectively, compared to
their non-cooled counterparts [ 21,24], likely because of the deleterious effect of heat stress
on the mammary gland turnover during the dry period [ 25]. Moreover, heat stress during
the dry period impairs the lifetime performance of dairy cows exposed to heat stress in
uterus, with late gestation heat stress alone costing USD 371 million per year to the dairy
industry in the United States [ 26].
Appropriate stall design and bedding management improve cow use of the bed,
improve lying time (up to 80 extra minutes in barns with the cleanest stalls) [ 27,28], decrease
lameness and hock lesions [ 29], and consequently improve milk production [ 30]. In a large
trial in free-stall farms in Canada, a 10 kg increase in milk production was associated with
each one-point percentage increment in the proportion of dry stalls [ 31]. Comfortable
and clean stalls are also important to keep dairy cows clean, decreasing the likelihood of
metritis because of poor hygiene [ 32]. In general, the easiest method to assess cow comfort
is simply to evaluate the cows’ behavior, their distribution pattern in the pen, and the use
of the stalls [ 28,33,34]. When monitoring cow comfort, the “cows will tell us” the answers.
Recommendations for management practices during the transition period are presented
in Table 1.
Body condition scoring is a simple, effective, and inexpensive monitoring parameter to
assess the nutritional status of dairy cows throughout lactation. Various BCS systems have
been described in different parts of the world using different scales [ 35,36]. Regardless
of scale, lower scores reﬂect thinner cows and higher scores reﬂect over-conditioned
cows. During early lactation, a loss of BCS is expected as dairy cows are mobilizing
their body reserves to support the increased nutrient demands of milk production. Live
body weight varies from 17 kg to 41 kg for each unit of BCS lost in primiparous and
multiparous Holstein-Friesian dairy cows, respectively [ 37,38]. As reviewed by Roche and
colleagues [ 39], changes in the body condition score in the transition period are expected
and can be used as a proxy to determine how dairy cows mobilize their body reserves to
support the increased nutrient demands of the transition period. Ideally, BCS would be
assessed at dry-off, calving, peak milk production (approximately 70 to 90 days in milk),
and, when possible, once more during mid-lactation in order to monitor BCS dynamics
throughout lactation, with an emphasis on the BCS dynamics in the transition period
(dry-off, calving, and peak milk). Targeting a BCS at calving of 3.0 to 3.25 (on a ﬁve-point
scale) will maximize milk production, while decreasing the risk of metabolic and infectious
diseases [ 40]. It is common for cows to lose between 0.5 to 1 point between calving and peak
lactation. Losses of more than one point have been associated with impaired reproductive
performance and should be avoided [ 41,42]. Cows that gained or maintained BCS during
Animals 2021 ,11, 352 4 of 17
the dry period [ 42] or between 21d before and 21d after calving [ 43] also had fewer health
disorders and improved performance compared to cows that lost BCS during the same
period. As soon as cows enter a period of positive nutrient balance (~9 weeks postpartum),
they will replenish the body reserves depleted in the ﬁrst third of their lactation. As a rule
of thumb, the BCS at dry-off (~12 months after calving) would be similar to the BCS at
calving, and, thus, cows should not lose or, likewise, gain much BCS during the dry period.
Although we do not expect cows to gain excessive BCS during this period, dairy cows can
increase their BCS by 0.25 to 0.5-points during the dry period. As a result, best-practice
would dictate that a target BCS for cows at dry-off is set, and that this score is maintained
or only increased fractionally during the dry period to avoid obesity at calving [ 38,44].
Target BCSs for the different stages of lactation are presented in Table 1. By consistently
monitoring BCS, dairy producers, veterinarians, and nutritionists are able to determine
if transition period nutritional management is optimal. This routine monitoring enables
the identiﬁcation of unexpected changes to BCS at different stages of lactation, in a timely
manner. If excessive loss or gain of BCS is observed, nutritional interventions can be
adopted to address this ﬁnding.
Table 1. Recommended feeding, bunk management, and management practices during the transi-
tion period.
Management Practice Goal
Removal of old feed from bunk Daily
Availability of feed >23 h/day
Feed push-up Every 4 h
Feed refusal 3–5%
Eating space >61cm/head (24 inches/head)
Water availability >10 linear cm/head (4 linear inches/head)
Stocking density1
Far-off dry cows 100%
Close-up dry cows280–100%
Fresh cow 80%
Prepartum dry matter intake
Primiparous >10 kg/day (22 pounds/day)
Multiparous >12 kg/day (26 pounds/day)
Postpartum dry matter intake
Primiparuos >15.5 kg/day (34 pounds/day)
Multiparous >19 kg/day (42 pounds/day)
Social grouping Separate parity groups
Additional cow comfort parameters
Hock scoring >80% of cows without hock lesions
Body condition score
Calving 3.0–3.25
Peak milk production (~70–90 DIM3) 2.5–3.0
Mid-lactation (~150 DIM3) 3.0–3.25
Dry-off 3.0–3.25
Cow behavior >60% of lying cows chewing their cud 2 h after feeding
1Stocking density calculated based on headlocks.2Recommended close-up dry cows sticking density varies
depending on breed and demographics of the pen. A lower stocking density (i.e., 80%) is beneﬁcial for Holstein
cattle and in herds where multiparous and primiparous animals are housed together. Higher stocking density
(i.e., 100%) can be used in Jersey cattle herds without negative effects on health and performance postpartum.
3DIM = days in milk
2.2. Milk Production in Early Lactation
Monitoring milk production and milk composition during the ﬁrst 2 to 3 months of
lactation can be a useful tool to assess transition cow performance. Each dairy farm can
establish its own goal for peak milk production for an ideal cow that calved normally,
received adequate diets, and did not develop any disease during the transition period,
depending on her parity and breed. Unfortunately, monitoring milk production has many
Animals 2021 ,11, 352 5 of 17
limitations, including a considerable lag between calving and peak milk production. The
50 to 90 days between measuring the outcome (peak milk production) and fresh cow events
is too long to enable prompt interventions to enhance a cow’s health and performance.
Therefore, peak milk production should not be used as a standalone trait when monitoring
milk production, even though monitoring milk production during early lactation can
help identify problems with cows during early lactation (i.e., less than expected milk
production between 50 and 120 days in milk). In addition, this information can be used
to monitor whether peak milk production matches management expectations (Figure 1).
Daily milk yield is a readily available and useful measure when monitoring transition
dairy cows, allowing for prompt changes to be made to address the problem(s) at hand [ 45].
Early lactation milk production can be used as a proxy for the overall health of early
lactation dairy cows and, combined with other information gathered during monthly Dairy
Herd Improvement Association (DHIA) testing (i.e., parity, breed, previous 305-day milk,
prior lactation length, month of calving, days dry, etc.), have been used to identify cows
with transition problems [ 45,46]. Decreased milk production in early lactation is strongly
associated with disease development and culling by the 100 days in milk (DIM) [ 46,47].
At the herd level, higher milk production in early lactation is associated with decreased
culling by the 60 DIM, when compared to herds with lower milk production in the same
period [ 12]. Unfortunately, the majority of dairy herds do not have equipment to measure
daily milk yield and rely on monthly testing.
events is too long to enable prompt interventions to enhance a cow’s health and perfor-
 
Figure 1. Milk production (kg; vertical axis) by days in milk (DIM; horizontal axis) for different
parity groups. The upper blue square highlights peak milk production between 60 and 120 DIM.
The lower red rectangle highlights problem cows (outliers characterized by low milk production,
compared with the rest of the herd between 50 and 120 DIM). Parity 1 (lactation = 1; blue dots),
Parity 2 (lactation = 2; red dots), Parity 3 (lactation > 3; green dots). Continuous lines represent the
average milk production for each parity group by days in milk.
2.3. Fresh Cow Health and Events
The periparturient health of dairy cows is critical for their performance throughout
their lactation [ 48,49]. More than 35% of all dairy cows, however, have at least one clinical
disease (metabolic and/or infectious), and approximately 60% have at least one subclinical
disease event during the ﬁrst 90 DIM [ 50,51]. Hence, daily screening of fresh cows during
the ﬁrst 2 weeks of lactation, when possible, is recommended to identify cows presenting
signs of sickness. Monitoring disease events during the ﬁrst few weeks of lactation provides
useful insights into how effectively transition period management supports cows during
this challenging period. In addition, the type of disease provides us with information about
