ABSTRACT
This study aimed to investigate the metabolic chang-
es in the livers of dairy cows from 1 wk before dry-off 
to 1 wk after calving. Twelve high-yielding Holstein cows were included in a longitudinal study and housed in a tie-stall barn. The cows were dried off at 6 wk before the expected calving date (dry period length = 42 d). During the entire lactation, the cows were milked twice daily at 0600 and 1700 h. Liver biopsies were taken from each cow at 4 different times: wk −7 (before drying off), −5 (after drying off), −1 and +1 relative to calving. A targeted metabolomics approach was performed by liquid chromatography and flow injection with electrospray ionization triple quadrupole mass spectrometry using the MxP® Quant 500 kit. A total of 185 metabolites in the liver were used for the final data analysis. Principal component analysis (PCA) revealed a clear separation by days of sampling, indicating a notable shift in metabolic phenotype from late lacta-tion to dry period and further changes after calving. Changes were observed in several classes of compounds, including amino acids and biogenic amines. In particu-lar, the changes in acylcarnitines (AcylCN), phospha-tidylcholines (PC), sphingomyelins (SM) and bile acids (BA) indicated extensive remodeling of the hepatic lipi-dome. The changes in AcylCN concentrations in early lactation suggest incomplete fatty acid oxidation in the liver, possibly indicating mitochondrial dysfunction or enzymatic imbalance. In addition, the changes in PC and SM species in early lactation indicate altered cell membrane composition, which may affect cell signaling and functionality. In addition, changes in BA concen-trations and profiles indicate dynamic adaptations in BA synthesis, lipid digestion and absorption during the observation period. In particular, PCA analysis showed an overlapping distribution of liver metabolites in primiparous and multiparous cows, indicating no significant difference between these groups. In addition, Volcano plots showed similar liver metabolism between primiparous and multiparous cows, with no significant fold changes (>1.5) in any metabolite at significant P-values (false discovery rate <0.05). These results provide valuable insight into the physiological ranges of liver metabolites during dry period and calving in healthy dairy cows and should contribute to the design and interpretation of future metabolite-based studies of the transition dairy cow.Keywords: liver, metabolic profiling, dry period, dairy cows
INTRODUCTION
The transition from late gestation to early lactation 
is a time of significant physiological and metabolic changes in dairy cows (Drackley et al., 2005). Prolonged or exacerbated dysregulation of these processes can lead to endocrine dysfunction, metabolic disorders, and infectious diseases (Sordillo and Raphael, 2013; Trevisi and Minuti, 2018; Lacasse et al., 2018). A key feature of this transition is negative energy balance (NEB), a metabolic state in which the cow relies on body energy to meet requirements in early lactation (Drackley, 1999; Ghaffari et al., 2023; Sadri et al., 2023). The NEB af-fects liver metabolism, increases fatty acid (FA), and often correlates with markers of oxidative stress (Over-ton et al., 2017; Bernabucci et al., 2005). Traditionally, research has focused on understanding the mechanisms behind adaptation to lactation. However, it is becoming increasingly evident that the metabolic and immuno-logical changes that occur during drying off also have implications for the successful establishment and main-tenance of lactation (Mezzetti et al., 2019). Therefore, Longitudinal characterization of the metabolome of dairy cows transitioning from one lactation to the next one: Investigations in the liver
M. H. Ghaffari,1* M. V. Sanz-Fernandez,2 H. Sadri,3,† H. Sauerwein,1 S. Schuchardt,4 J. Martín-Tereso,2 and J. 
B. Daniel2*
1 Institute of Animal Science, Physiology Unit, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany.
2 Trouw Nutrition R&D, P.O. Box 299, 3800 AG, Amersfoort, The Netherlands.
3 Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tabriz, 5166616471 Tabriz, Iran.
4 Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, 30625 Hannover, GermanyJ. Dairy Sci. TBC
https://doi.org/10.3168/jds.2023-24432
© TBC, The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Dairy Science Association®. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Received November 14, 2023.
Accepted December 12, 2023.*Corresponding Authors: morteza1@
 uni -bonn  .de and Jean-
Baptiste.Daniel@  trouwnutrition  .com
†H. Sadri was a visiting scientist at the Institute of Animal Science, 
Physiology Unit, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany, at the time the research was done.

Journal of Dairy Science Vol. TBC No. TBC, TBCsome authors have suggested redefining the transition 
period to include the dry period (Mezzetti et al., 2021).
The ability of the liver to meet increased metabolic 
demands during the peripartum period is critical for cows to successfully adapt to lactation (Graber et al., 2010; Ha et al., 2017; Schären et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2021). The liver controls various physiological activi-ties that require macronutrient metabolism, such as energy substrate oxidation, glucose homeostasis, and immune modulation (Aschenbach et al., 2010; Trefts et al., 2017; Ghaffari et al., 2021). The liver is at the center of these processes and controls both homeostatic and homeopathic processes, reflecting its central role in energy regulation (Allen, 2020).
Metabolomics, the scientific discipline dedicated to 
the description of metabolic processes, has become a cornerstone in dairy cattle research (Dervishi et al., 2017; Ghaffari et al., 2019a), driven by recent tech-nological advancements allowing detailed metabolite analysis (Reyes-Garces and Gionfriddo, 2019). Quan-titative metabolomics has revolutionized our ability to analyze metabolites and improved our understanding of metabolic processes (Ebbels et al., 2023; Plumb et al., 2023). The LC-MS /MS-based Biocrates MxP
® 
Quant 500 platform enables comprehensive targeted metabolomics covering up to 630 metabolites from various biochemical categories, including biogenic amines, bile acids, amino acids, their derivatives, and lipids such as acylcarnitines (AcylCN), phosphatidyl-cholines (PC), sphingomyelins (SM), ceramides, and glycerides. Metabolomics has proven useful in under-standing metabolic shifts and physiological responses in periparturient cows (Kenez et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017; Derno et al., 2019). In a recent study, Zhang et al. (2023) used metabolomics and proteomics to explore liver metabolism in transition cows and de-scribed increased gluconeogenesis, FA oxidation, and other metabolic pathways critical to energy utilization in postpartum dairy cows. Although progress has been made in understanding metabolic changes in dairy cows during the peripartum period and early lactation, gaps in knowledge remain, particularly with respect to liver function and the changes related to drying-off.
The complexity of metabolic pathways in the liver 
during this period and their impact on cow’s health and productivity are not fully understood. Therefore, the objective of this study was to comprehensively inves-tigate the liver metabolome changes in Holstein dairy cows before and during dry-off and around calving.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This study was conducted at the Dairy Research 
Facility of Trouw Nutrition Research & Development (Kempenshof, Boxmeer, the Netherlands). All proce-dures described in this article were following the Dutch Law on Experimental Animals, which is following ETS123 (Council of Europe 1985 and the 86/609/EEC Directive) and were approved by the Central Author-ity for Scientific Procedures on Animals (CCD, The Netherlands). The outcomes in terms of DMI, milk production, total-tract nutrient digestibility, energy balance, and N balance were reported earlier (Daniel et al., 2022).
Animals, diets, and sampling
Twelve Holstein Friesian cows were studied. Of these, 
6 cows were in their first lactation, while the remaining 6 cows were in their second through fifth lactation (3.2 ± 1.2; mean ± SD). Approximately 10 weeks before expected calving, cows were moved from a free stall to a tie-stall with individual feeding troughs and free access to water. The ingredients and chemical composition of the experimental diets are shown in Supplemental Table S1 (https:
 / / figshare  .com/  account/  articles/  24777042). 
Cows were dried-off 6 wk before the expected calving date. Liver tissue samples were collected on wk −7, −5, −1, and +1 relative to calving (see Daniel et al., 2023 for more details). The biopsy of the liver tissue was per-formed under sedation by intramuscular administration of 0.5 mL of a solution containing 20 mg/mL xylazine (Sedazine, Produlab Pharma B.V.). The previously shaved surgical site was thoroughly cleansed with 3 al-ternating rounds of povidone-iodine scrub, followed by rinsing with 70% isopropyl alcohol. After disinfection of the surgical site, 6 mL of a solution containing 20 mg/mL procaine hydrochloride (Procamidor, Richter Pharma AG, Wels, Austria) was administered to the subcutaneous space and intercostal muscles. The surgi-cal site was again disinfected. After a 2-cm incision of the skin, a stainless-steel liver biopsy instrument was inserted. The incision site was located between the 10th and 11th ribs at the intersection of the line running from the right hip to the tip of the elbow of the front right leg of the animal. Approximately 1 g of liver tis-sue was collected, and the incision site was closed with staples, which were removed after at least 10 d. The tis-sue was placed in a Petri dish, rinsed with sterile saline, cut into 3 sections, transferred to 3 separate cryovials, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C until analysis. After the procedure, 3 mL per 100 kg BW of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug containing 100 mg/mL ketoprofen (Ceva Santé Animale B.V.) were administered intramuscularly.
For dry-off, milking was abruptly stopped, and the 
teats were sealed using OrbeSeal (Zoetis). In addition, their diet was switched from a lactation diet to a dry Ghaffari et al.: LIVER METABOLOMIC PROFILES OF DAIRY COW

Journal of Dairy Science Vol. TBC No. TBC, TBCcow diet. In summary, the total mixed ration (TMR) 
for lactating cows consisted of 42% grass silage, 29% corn silage, and 29% concentrate (on a DM basis). The TMR for dry cows consisted of 50% corn silage, 34% barley straw, and 15% concentrate (on a DM basis). The animals were fed the TMR ad libitum.
Metabolomics analysis and data processing. To 
prepare liver tissue samples for metabolomic analysis, the extraction protocol of Biocrates Life Sciences AG (Innsbruck, Austria) was used, based on the work of Zukunft et al. (2018). In brief, 100 mg of liver tissue was homogenized in ethanol/phosphate buffer (85:15 at a tissue-to-solvent ratio of 1:3, wt/vol) in a 2 mL Pre-cellys
® CK14 tube containing 1.4 mm ceramic (zirconi-
um oxide) beads in a Precellys® 24 tissue homogenizer 
(Bertin Technologies SAS, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France). Three consecutive 20-s homogenization cycles were performed at 5500 rpm with 30-s pauses. After homogenization, the samples were cooled on ice for 20 min, inverting them every 5 min to maintain homoge-neity. They were then centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 5 min at 4°C to obtain a uniform supernatant.
Metabolite concentrations were determined using 
the MxP
® Quant 500 kit (Biocrates Life Sciences AG, 
Innsbruck, Austria) according to the manufacturer's protocol (https:
 / / biocrates  .com/  mxp -quant  -500 -kit, 
accessed December 14, 2021) via tandem mass spec-trometry at the Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine (ITEM, Hannover, Germany) as previously described by Mahajan et al. (2020). Lip-ids were measured by flow injection analysis tandem mass spectrometry (FIA-MS/MS) on a 5500 QTRAP
® 
instrument (AB Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany) with an electrospray ionization source, whereas small molecules were measured by liquid chromatography-mass spec-trometry (LC-MS/MS) on an Agilent 1290 Infinity II liquid chromatography system (Santa Clara, CA) coupled to a tandem mass spectrometer. Detection of analytes in the extracts was performed by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) using the FIA-MS/MS and LC-MS/MS methods. Sample preparation devices based on 96-well plates were used, with inserts contain-ing internal standards and a predetermined number of samples. For certain analytes (e.g., AA), a phenyl isothiocyanate solution was added for derivatization. After derivatization, the target analytes were extracted with an organic solvent and then diluted.
Data quantification was performed using Sciex 
Analyst
® MS software (Analyst 1.7.2 Build 8287) and 
imported into Biocrates MetIDQTM software (Oxygen-DB110–3023) for analyte identification, concentration calculation, and data compilation. The LC-MS/MS assay used stable isotope dilution and 7-point calibra-tion curves for quantification of metabolites. For the FIA-MS/MS assay, metabolite concentrations were calculated using a one-point calibration of the internal standard and were also isotopically corrected. Quanti-fication of metabolites was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol using MetIDQ Boron software for targeted metabolome data processing and manage-ment. Limits of detection (LOD) were determined us-ing blank phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) samples (3 replicates). The median values of all PBS samples on the plate were used as a measure of background noise per metabolite. The LOD was calculated as 3 times the signal in the blank extracted and analyzed immediately before the sample runs, based on Biocrates SOP. Values below the LOD were treated as missing. Liver metabo-lite concentrations were calculated in μmoL/mg tissue and normalized with internal quality control samples.
The MxP
® Quant 500 kit allows quantitative analysis 
of metabolites from 12 biochemical classes of lipids and an additional 14 classes of small molecules. The side chain composition of lipids is abbreviated as “Cx:y,”” where “x” represents the total number of carbons in one or both side chains and “y” represents the total number of double bonds. As with phosphatidylcholines (PC), “a” stands for an ester bond and “e” for an ether bond in the glycerol unit. The letters “aa” ( = diacyl) and “ae” ( = acyl-alkyl) stand for 2 FA residues at positions sn-1 and sn-2 in the glycerol backbone, while “a” ( = acyl) stands for a single FA residue at position sn-1. In this way, PC were classified as diacyl-PC (PC aa x:y) (choline lecithin), acyl-alkyl- PC (PC ae x:y) (choline plasmalogens), and lysophosphatidylcholines (lyso-PC a x:y) (choline lysolecithin). For cholesterol esters (CE), the number of double bonds and carbon atoms (y) in the FA residue (x) was referred to as “CE (x:y).”
Statistical Analyses
Multivariate Analyses. Statistical analysis of the 
liver metabolite data was performed using the web-based metabolomic data processing tool MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (Pang et al., 2021); see http:
 / / www .metaboanalyst  
.ca for detailed methodology). To hedge the integrity of the collected data, the .csv file was carefully checked in advance to ensure that the data matrix consisted of numeric units only and that standard formatting protocols were followed. To eliminate outliers, vari-ables were subjected to an Interquartile Range (IQR) assessment, with outliers defined as those deviating more than 1.5 times from the first or third quartile. To ensure the accuracy and reliability of the statisti-cal analysis, all variables with more than 5% missing values were excluded (Pang et al., 2021). To address issues related to heteroskedasticity and skewness, the Ghaffari et al.: LIVER METABOLOMIC PROFILES OF DAIRY COW

Journal of Dairy Science Vol. TBC No. TBC, TBCdata were subjected to a generalized log-transformation 
(base 10) along with Pareto scaling (mean-centered and divided by the square root of the standard deviation of each variable). The data were then processed us-ing the MetaboAnalyst 5.0 tool, which allowed us to perform a variety of multivariate data analyses. These analyses included principal component analysis (PCA), partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), informative heat map generation, and hierarchical clustering (Pang et al., 2021). Additionally, PCA and Volcano plots were used to compare liver metabolites in primiparous and multiparous cows, focusing on the sampling times (wk −7, −5, −1, and +1 relative to calving). The Volcano plots, considering a fold change (FC) of 1.5 and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 for adjusted P-values, incorporated log-transformed and Pareto-scaled data.
Univariate Analysis. Descriptive statistics were 
performed with the statistical software JASP, version 0.14 (JASP Team, 2019). Changes in metabolite con-centrations were examined with linear mixed-effects models that included repeated measures and analyses of variance (ANOVA). In this model structure, individual cows were treated as a random effect and sampling time as a fixed effect. This analysis was facilitated by the statsmodels library (version 0.12.2; accessible at https:
 
/ / www .statsmodels  .org) in Python (version 3.9.5). Be-
fore proceeding with model fitting, we used the scipy (version 1.6.3) and matplotlib (version 3.4.2) libraries in Python to check the assumptions of normality and homoscedasticity. In cases where these assumptions were not met, the numpy library (version 1.21.2) was used for the necessary data transformations, including logarithmic transformations to ensure a more symmet-ric and homoscedastic distribution. After transforma-tion, specific models were fitted for each metabolite, followed by derivation of p-values. These p-values were used to assess the significance of temporal variations in metabolite concentrations. Given the large number of assays performed, the resulting p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to control for FDR (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). The threshold for significance was set at P ≤ 0.05; trends were de-clared at 0.05 < P < 0.10.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
An investigation of the liver metabolomic data through 
PCA analysis (Figure 1A) revealed that the first prin-cipal component explained 31% of the total variation, meaning that roughly one-third of the changes in liver metabolites are captured by this principal component. Collectively, the first 2 principal components accounted for 43% of the total variation, i.e., a substantial amount given the complex nature of the metabolomic data set. During antepartum (wk −7, −5, and −1 relative to calving), the metabolic characteristics of dairy cows differed significantly from those observed after calving (wk +1). It was observed that during the dry-off period (wk −7 and −5) the differences in liver metabolites were less pronounced than the changes after calving. To test the significance of the observed class differences, PLS-DA, a powerful multivariate statistical approach, was used. Score plots derived from the PLS-DA analy-sis showed a clear separation in the liver metabolome between sampling times (as shown in Figure 1B). This separation was further confirmed by a permutation test, a robust statistical method that assesses the prob-ability of such differentiation by chance alone (as shown in Figure 1C). The predictive ability of the PLS-DA model was confirmed by cross-validation, which yielded Q
2 and R2 values of 92 and 98, respectively (Figure 1D). 
These high values, particularly the Q2 value (indicat-
ing predictive relevance) and the R2 value (indicating 
explained variance), demonstrate the robustness of the model in accurately predicting the metabolic status of dairy cows based on liver metabolite profiles. This un-derscores the effectiveness of the model in detecting sig-nificant metabolic shifts during the transition from the preceding to the following lactation. To our knowledge this is the first publication reporting hepatic metabolic changes around dry off and how they compared with the transition period.
Small, non-lipid metabolites
Figure 2 illustrates the changes in hepatic AA during 
the sampling times (wk −7, −5, −1 and +1 relative to calving). The heat map provides a visual representation of these changes and shows the temporal dynamics of AA concentrations in the liver. Hepatic AAs clustered into 2 main groups, largely determined by post-calving changes. The first cluster comprised AA whose con-centration decreased overall but increased sharply after calving. Among these, time of sampling was significant for Gly, Asp, Glu, Trp, Met and Phe; tended to be significant for Tyr and Asn (P ≤ 0.08); and did not differ for Ser, Ile, Leu. Similarly, Schären et al. (2021) observed a general increase in AA concentration in the liver after calving, which they attributed to the increase in energy requirements and AA turnover. The increase in AA concentration in the liver could also reflect the increase in CP supply in the lactation ration. How-ever, this was not observed in late lactation (wk −7) when cows were fed the same lactation diet, suggesting changes related to adaptation to the onset of lacta-tion. The observed increase in these AA after calving could indicate an increased availability of these AA for Ghaffari et al.: LIVER METABOLOMIC PROFILES OF DAIRY COW

Journal of Dairy Science Vol. TBC No. TBC, TBCprotein synthesis, energy production, gluconeogenesis 
and the formation of FA and ketone bodies to meet the increased protein and energy requirements of lactation. Interestingly, Ile, Leu, Met and Phe within this cluster also showed a numerical increase after drying off, which may indicate their involvement in processes related to the completion and onset of lactation, such as inflam-mation and oxidative stress (Daniel et al., 2022).
A second cluster included AA, whose concentration 
decreased after calving, although only Ala and Cys changed significantly over time. Within this cluster, Gln, Lys, Val, Arg, His, Cys and Pro showed elevated levels during the dry period (wk −5 and −1 relative to calving) compared with the late (wk −7) and early lactation (wk +1) stages. Coincidentally, this pattern was mirrored in blood urea nitrogen (Daniel et al., 2022). It is not known how hepatic deamination of this specific group of AA might contribute to the blood urea nitrogen pool. Finally, Ala and Thr followed a different temporal pattern, gradually decreasing from late lacta-
Ghaffari et al.: LIVER METABOLOMIC PROFILES OF DAIRY COW
Figure 1. (A) Principal component analysis (PCA) scores plot showing the relationship between principal components (PC) 1 and 2 applied 
to the longitudinal liver metabolome of dairy cows. Each symbol represents the PC values of a cow at a specific sampling week. Symbols of dif-
ferent colors represent different weeks relative to parturition (weeks −7, −5, −1, +1). (B) Two-dimensional scores plot of Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA) showcasing the separation of the longitudinal liver metabolome of dairy cows. PLS-DA is a statistical method used to classify and distinguish sampling time based on their liver metabolomic profiles. (C) Presents PLS-DA model cross-validation using a leave-one-out tech-nique, with Q
2 value indicating predictive relevance and R2 value showing explained variance, assessing model performance and generalizability 
(D) Permutation test results, indicating the prediction accuracy during training. The permutation test is a statistical technique used to validate the significance of a model's predictive performance by randomly shuffling the data labels and assessing the resulting accuracy.

