ABSTRACT
Dairy cows commonly experience health disorders in 
the early-lactation period. Although Fourier-transform 
infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy offers a noninvasive and cost-effective method for analyzing milk composition, its potential in predicting subsequent early-lactation diseases has yet to be adequately explored. This study aimed to uncover the ability of milk FTIR spectra to predict postpartum diseases in 1,162 Holstein cows from a commercial dairy farm in Cayuga County, NY . We col-lected proportional milk samples daily on cows in the early-lactation pen and stored milk at 4°C until analysis via FTIR spectroscopy. Cows were monitored through 30 DIM and classified as healthy (n = 825; no adverse health events) or diseased (n = 311; diagnosis of clinical ketosis, metritis, displaced abomasum, or mastitis, or any combination of these). We developed predictive models for 8 distinct time periods preceding the diagnosis date (>10 d, 10–8 d, 7–6 d, 5–4 d, 3 d, 2 d, 1 d, and 0 d), using regression, machine learning, and deep-learning methods applied to milk FTIR spectral data. Model performance was evaluated through a repeated down-sampled double cross-validation framework and permutation tests. Our results showed that progressive changes in spectral re-gions related to the absorbance peaks of fat, protein, and lactose are correlated with disease progression, leading to an increase in average area under the receiver oper -
ating characteristic curve (AUROC) from 0.50 (>10 d before diagnosis) to 0.72 (1 d prior) and 0.76 (the day of diagnosis) across all model types. Partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) models using milk FTIR spectra achieved an average AUROC of 0.71 from 7 d before diagnosis, outperforming models based on cow-level features (0.62) or combined with spectra-predicted milk major components (0.67). Among spectral models, PLS-DA reached the highest average AUROC (0.74), fol-lowed by long short-term memory (0.72), and surpassed ridge regression (0.71) and random forest (0.69). These findings highlight the effectiveness of using milk FTIR spectra to predict upcoming health conditions in early-lactation Holstein dairy cows, although broader evalua-tion is necessary to assess generalizability and on-farm utility.Key words: milk spectra, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, machine learning, deep learning
INTRODUCTION
Early lactation is a critical period for the health, fertil-
ity, and productivity of dairy cows. During this time, energy deficit can lead to excessive fat mobilization, increasing the risk of metabolic and infectious diseases such as hyperketonemia, metritis, retained placenta, displaced abomasum (DAb), and mastitis (Hammon et al., 2006; Chapinal et al., 2011; Hertl et al., 2018). Currently, blood metabolic profiling serves as the most common method to monitor the health status of dairy cows in early-lactation period (Overton et al., 2017). Several blood markers, including glucose, nonesterified fatty acids, and BHB are widely used as key indicators of diseases (Leblanc 2010; McArt et al., 2012; Esposito et al., 2014). Although effective, blood sampling and the associated analysis are costly, labor-intensive, and invasive, limiting their large-scale and daily applica-tion. This highlights the need to develop and apply new methods to monitor the health status of early-lactation dairy cows.
There is increasing evidence suggesting variations 
in milk composition mirror the change in health status of dairy cows (Hamann and Krömker 1997; Overton Predicting postpartum diseases in Holstein cows using milk spectra  and machine learning—Retrospective assessment from diagnosis date
D. Lin,1 J. Li,2,3,4*† J. A. Seminara,1 and J. A. A. McArt1*† 
1Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
2City University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
3Department of Infectious Diseases and Public Health, Jockey Club College of Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences,  
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
4School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
J. Dairy Sci. TBC
https://doi.org/10.3168/jds.2024-26216
© TBC, The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Dairy Science Association®. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
The list of standard abbreviations for JDS is available at adsa.org/jds-abbreviations-25. Nonstandard abbreviations are available in the Notes.Received December 23, 2024.
Accepted September 8, 2025.*These authors contributed equally to this work.†Corresponding authors: jun.li@
 cityu  .edu .hk and jmcart@  cornell  
.edu

Journal of Dairy Science Vol. TBC No. TBC, TBCet al., 2017; Gross and Bruckmaier 2019), and milk 
analysis has shown evident advantages in practice due to its noninvasiveness and ability to be incorporated into current standard milking procedures (Giannuzzi et al., 2023). Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic analysis of milk is a rapid and cost-effective method that has been routinely used for quantification of milk compositions (i.e., fat, protein, CN, lactose, and urea; Luinge et al., 1993; De Marchi et al., 2014; Grelet et al., 2015), and in recent years, FTIR spectroscopy of milk has gained attention as a noninvasive tool for predicting early-lactation health outcomes in dairy cows. Various studies have indicated its effectiveness in predicting energy status (McParland et al., 2011; McParland et al., 2014), with FTIR-determined milk fatty acids and BHB linked to energy deficit and hyperketonemia, yielding area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 77% to 82% (Churakov et al., 2021) and 
sensitivities of 76% to 82% (Van Knegsel et al., 2010; van der Drift et al., 2012; Bonfatti et al., 2019). This technology has also been applied to mastitis detection, achieving sensitivities of 50% to 95% and specificities of 32% to 85% (Soyeurt et al., 2012; Dale et al., 2019; Rienesl et al., 2022), as well as differentiation of normo-calcemic cows from those with subclinical hypocalcemia (Seminara et al., 2023). Despite these promising results, some key limitations still persist. Most existing studies have relied on infrequent milk sampling (e.g., monthly or sporadic), which limits the ability to capture spectral dynamics preceding disease onset, thereby limiting FTIR spectroscopy’s potential in predicting upcoming disease events. Although Bach et al. (2019) collected milk at 4 time points between 3 and 18 DIM and found FTIR spec-troscopic–predicted milk components were promising indicators of subsequent disease or removal, predictive models integrating raw milk spectra with cow-level in-formation are still in their infancy, and the crucial spec-tral regions contributing to the prediction also remain unidentified.
Our goal was to advance our understanding of milk 
FTIR spectroscopic analysis and determine its potential utility in predicting upcoming disease in early-lactation dairy cows using a series of modeling techniques, where “disease” represents a combined group of multiple post-partum conditions with potentially heterogeneous spec-tral patterns. Our specific objectives were to (1) evaluate whether milk spectra become increasingly abnormal and more beneficial for prediction as disease diagnosis nears, (2) explore the performance of various machine learn-ing and deep-learning methods using milk FTIR spectral data, milk yield, SCC, and parity in predicting disease within the first 30 DIM, and (3) determine which spectral regions are most informative for prediction.MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Approval, Design, and Population
Our research project was reviewed by the Cornell 
University Institutional Care and Use Committee and determined not to meet the regulatory Cornell Policy 1.4 “Description for use of animals for research, teach-ing, or testing” because there was no animal contact or manipulation. Subsequently, our project research appli-cation underwent ethical and scientific review and was approved by the Cornell University Veterinary Clinical Studies Committee (CUVCSC Protocol ID#062420–05).
We conducted a prospective observational cohort 
study from June through August 2021 on a single com-mercial dairy farm in Cayuga County, NY . An informed consent letter approving participation in our study was signed by the farm owner. This farm was selected based on proximity to the Cornell Ambulatory and Production Medicine Clinic (Ithaca, NY) and its history of successful prior participation in research studies. Our project was designed, analyzed, and written following the STROBE-vet guidelines for strengthening the reporting of obser -
vational studies in veterinary epidemiology (Sargeant et al., 2016).
The farm housed approximately 4,400 lactating cows 
which were milked 3 times a day via a 100-stall rotary parlor (DeLaval). During the study period, cows aver -
aged 43.5 kg of milk per cow per day. Lactating cows were housed in 10 freestall pens and bedded with re-cycled manure solids. The early-lactation pen, a 3-row design, commingled primiparous and multiparous cows which were moved from the maternity pen after their first milking within 8 h of calving. Cows remained in the early-lactation pen until moved to a high production pen between 7 and 21 DIM. Timing of movement out of the early-lactation pen was based on management decisions regarding parity, daily milk yield, and pen stocking den-sity. The early-lactation pen was fed once daily at 0745 h and milked at 0230, 1030, and 1830 h. Ingredients and formulated nutrient composition of the early-lactation TMR can be found in Callero et al. (2023).
Animal Sampling and Farm Data Extraction
Cows in the early-lactation pen at any point during 
our study period were eligible for inclusion. On Monday through Friday, we collected proportional milk samples (DeLaval Fat Sampler MM25–27 BC; DeLaval) from all cows in the early-lactation pen once daily at the 1030 h milking. After automatic retraction of the milking unit at the conclusion of each cow’s milking, the proportional sampler cup was removed, and milk was inverted 3 times Lin et al.: HEALTH VIA MILK

Journal of Dairy Science Vol. TBC No. TBC, TBCbefore being poured into 60-mL plastic vials without 
preservatives (Aptar CSP Technologies). At the con-clusion of the 1030 h early-lactation pen milking shift (approximately 1100 h), we placed the milk samples in ice-filled coolers and transported samples at 4°C to the Barbano Laboratory in the Department of Food Sci-ence at Cornell University (Ithaca, NY) for FTIR spec-troscopic analysis and SCC determination, which was measured and calibrated as described previously (Bach et al., 2021).
Sixty days after the conclusion of the sample-col-
lection portion of the study, we extracted disease data from the farm’s software recording system (DairyComp 305; V AS). Diseases of interest included farm-diagnosed ketosis, metritis, DAb, and mastitis within 30 DIM and were defined based on the following farm protocols: ketosis, a blood BHB concentration ≥1.2 mmol/L us-ing a handheld device (Precision Xtra; Abbott) on cows flagged by computer software for physical examination due to a decrease in milk yield; metritis, a cow with pres-ence of foul-smelling brown to red vaginal discharge and a rectal temperature ≥39.7°C; DA, auscultation of a ping sound on simultaneous percussion over the left or right abdomen in a line extending from the tuber coxae to the olecranon on cows flagged by computer software for physical examination due to a decrease in milk yield; and mastitis, based on visual identification of a hot and swol-len quarter and presence of abnormal milk with or with-out garget. A binary variable was created for the target health outcome for each cow, and cows diagnosed with at least one disease within the first 30 DIM were labeled “diseased,” whereas cows without these diagnoses in the same period were considered “healthy.”
Initially, we obtained 7,142 milk samples with valid 
FTIR spectra from 1,162 early-lactation cows. We ex-cluded 88 samples (n = 51 cows) collected after 30 DIM, and 728 samples (n = 125 cows) collected after the di-agnosis of at least one disease (ketosis, metritis, DA, or mastitis). This resulted in a final data set of 6,326 milk samples (n = 1,136 cows): 1,306 samples (n = 311 cows) in the disease group and 5,020 samples (n = 825 cows) in the healthy group. An illustration of cows and sample enrollment is shown in Figure 1A.
Milk Spectra Preprocessing
Milk spectra were measured with a FTIR spectropho-
tometer (Lactoscope model CombiScope FT600, Delta Instruments, Drachten, the Netherlands) within 0.6 ± 0.7 d of collection as described by Callero et al. (2023). Each spectrum consisted of 935 absorbance values (log[1/transmittance]) between 4,000 and 990 cm
−1 with a reso-lution of 8 cm−1. For the spectra, highly noisy regions 
(<3,000 cm−1; >1,000 cm−1; 1,700–1,585 cm−1), which is 
the consequence of a high CaF 2 and water absorption, 
were first removed (Heuer et al., 2001). To improve the signal-to-noise ratio, multiple measurements of spectra were then averaged for each sample (Subramanian et al., 2009; Pazzola et al., 2023). Most milk samples had 2 replicate measurements, with the distribution of repli-cates as follows: 1 (4 samples), 2 (6,264 samples), 3 (26 samples), 4 (31 samples), and 5 (1 sample). Finally, each individual milk FTIR spectrum was min-max normalized to a [0,1] range to boost wavenumbers with potentially important information for modeling. The illustration of milk spectra preprocessing procedures is shown in Fig-ure 1A.
Based on the absorption of different milk compo-
nents, the spectra were split into 4 regions: R1, spanning 3,000–2,800 cm
−1, mainly consisting of symmetrical and 
asymmetrical CH 2-stretch peaks at 2,923 cm−1 and 2,854 
cm−1 respectively, related to fat absorption; R2, cover -
ing 1,800–1,700 cm−1, also related to fat absorption; R3, 
spanning 1,585–1,000 cm−1, serving as the fingerprint 
area of protein (1,540 cm−1), lactose (1,040 cm−1) and fat 
(1,461 cm−1 and 1,157 cm−1); and R4, the wavenumber 
regions covering 2,800–1,800 cm−1, typically regarded as 
nonspecific signals.
Modeling
Framework. We adopted a repeated down-sampled 
double cross-validation framework in this study. First, to avoid biased results from the overrepresented healthy group (Tyagi and Mittal 2020; Susan and Kumar 2021), we randomly down-sampled cow-level samples from the healthy group an equal number of samples to that of the disease group. To account for potential confounding by lactation stage, each down-sampled healthy subset was matched to the disease group by DIM distribution, ensuring both groups had comparable DIM profiles (Supplemental Figure S1, see Notes). This random sub-sampling process was repeated 50 times to ensure thor -
ough utilization of data from the healthy group. Then, for each balanced dataset, we applied a repeated double cross-validation strategy to integrate both model selec-tion and performance evaluation (Filzmoser et al., 2009; Szymańska et al., 2012). This procedure involves 2 nest-ed cross-validation loops: an inner loop for model selec-tion and an outer loop for model assessment. In the outer loop, the dataset was randomly partitioned into training and test sets, with the test set held out exclusively for fi-nal evaluation. To prevent data leakage, cross-validation was performed at the cow level (based on cow ID), en-Lin et al.: HEALTH VIA MILK

Journal of Dairy Science Vol. TBC No. TBC, TBCsuring that samples from the same individual were not 
split across training and test sets within any fold. Within the inner loop, the training set was further split into in-ner training and validation subsets. The inner training set was used to fit models under varying hyperparameter configurations (e.g., number of components, trees, or neural network layers), and the validation set was used to identify the optimal configuration. The model with the best inner-loop performance was then evaluated on the test set from the outer loop. This outer-loop procedure was repeated until every cow-level sample had served as a test instance exactly once, ensuring that the perfor -
mance estimates reflect generalization to unseen data. In our study, both the inner and outer cross-validation loops were implemented as 5-fold cross-validation, with a 4:1 split of training to validation or test within each loop, to balance estimation reliability and runtime efficiency under a computationally intensive repeated double cross-validation scheme. The entire double cross-validation procedure was then repeated 5 times with different random partitions to enhance robustness and mitigate variability due to data partitioning. The repeated down-sampled double cross-validation framework is illustrated in Figure 1B.Models. Predictive models were constructed using 
Scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2012). To find the model with the best performance, we evaluated a branch of classifiers, including regression-based models (partial least squares-discriminant analysis [PLS-DA] and ridge regression), tree-based model (random forest [RF]) and deep-learning model (long short-term memory [LSTM]).
PLS-DA. As a classic method for spectra analysis, 
PLS-DA (Barker and Rayens, 2003) was set up as the baseline to compare the predictive performance between different models. It was fitted using the PLSRegres-sion() in Scikit-learn. If a cow’s predictive probability was greater than 0.5, the cow was classified as 1 (disease group); otherwise, the cow was considered as 0 (healthy group). To determine the optimal number of latent vari-ables, a hyperparameter search was conducted by vary-ing the number of components (n_components) from 2 to 20 in steps of 2.
Ridge Regression
Ridge regression (Hoerl and Kennard, 1970) is a pe-
nalized regression model that applies L2 regularization to address multicollinearity in high-dimensional spectral Lin et al.: HEALTH VIA MILK
Figure 1. Illustration of the study design and dataset. (A) Retrospective evaluation of milk FTIR spectroscopy for disease prediction within 30  
DIM. This study included 5,020 milk samples in the healthy group (n = 825; no adverse health events) and 1,306 milk samples in the disease group (n 
= 311; diagnosis of clinical ketosis, metritis, DAb, or mastitis, or any combination thereof) from a single commercial farm in central New York. (B) Schematic of the repeated down-sampled double cross-validation and feature fusion strategy for integrating spectral and cow-level static features.  
Out. = outer, Train = training, In. = inner, Val = validation. (C) Parity distribution in healthy and disease groups. (D) Case incidence of each disease. (E, F) Milk yield (kg) per milking (E) and linear score SCC: log
10(SCC) in thousand cells/mL (F) distributions for healthy and disease groups across 
various time points before disease diagnosis. *P  < 0.05. **P  < 0.01. ***P  < 0.001.

Journal of Dairy Science Vol. TBC No. TBC, TBCdata. It was implemented using the RidgeClassifier() 
function in Scikit-learn. The optimal value of α was de-termined by searching over the range 0.5 to 1.0 with a step size of 0.1.
RF
Random forest is an ensemble method based on bagged 
decision trees, capable of modeling nonlinear relation-ships and handling the complexity of high-dimensional spectral data (Breiman 2001). It was built using the RandomForestClassifier() function in Scikit-learn. To optimize model performance, a random search was con-ducted over the number of trees (n_estimators), evalu-ated at 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50.
LSTM
Long short-term memory, a type of recurrent neural 
network (RNN), uses memory gates to capture long-term dependencies and address vanishing gradient issues (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). Its ability to model sequential data makes it well-suited for spectra organized by wavenumber (Tan et al., 2022). In this study, LSTM models were implemented using an in-house Python script based on TensorFlow 1.12.0. Hyperparameter opti-mization was performed by varying the number of LSTM units (5, 10, 15, 20). The final architecture consisted of an LSTM layer, followed by a multilayer perceptron layer with 64 neurons and a ReLU activation function, and a sigmoid-activated output layer with 1 neuron for binary prediction. The models were trained using the Adam optimizer (learning rate = 0.0001) for 200 epochs with a batch size of 64.
Dataset. To investigate whether model performance 
improved as the diagnosis date approached, we split the data in the disease group, including preprocessed milk spectra, milk yield per milking, SCC, and DIM into 8 subsets based on days before the diagnosis date: >10 d, 10 to 8 d, 7 to 6 d, 5 to 4 d, 3 d, 2 d, 1 d and 0 d. Each of these subsets was combined with the full healthy group to construct separate predictive models. As described earli-er, we used a double cross-validation framework with 50 rounds of random downsampling from the healthy group, matching the size and DIM distribution of each disease subset.
For each time point subset, we performed 3 sets of 
comparative analyses to evaluate model performance:
 1. We compared the capabilities of preprocessed milk FTIR spectra, which describe the absorbance at each wave number, with their first-order deriva-tives (Savitzky–Golay first-order derivatives, 3 data points each side; Savitzky and Golay 1964; De Marchi et al., 2009; De Marchi et al., 2011) for disease prediction;
 2. We compared 2 spectral regions described previ-ously: R1+R2+R3 and R1+R2+R3+R4, to explore whether R4 could convey useful information for disease prediction;
 3. We examined whether milk FTIR spectra provide additional predictive value beyond readily avail-able cow-level features that represent current industry standards by using PLS-DA models. To do so, we systematically compared models using (1) FTIR milk spectra alone, (2) commonly used cow-level features (milk yield, SCC, parity, and DIM) alone, (3) these cow-level features plus FT -
IR-derived milk composition traits (fat %, protein %, and lactose %; Callero et al., 2023), and (4) all features combined. The categorical feature “par -
ity” was one-hot encoded into 3 binary variables (1, 2, or 3+) using Scikit-learn’s OneHotEncoder. Continuous features, including milk yield, SCC, DIM, fat %, protein %, and lactose %, were min-max normalized to a [0,1] range. All static features and spectral data, each scaled to the [0, 1] range, as previously described, were concatenated into a single input array to allow PLS-DA to capture the interaction among them.
Modeling Evaluation. To evaluate the statistical sig-
nificance of model performance metrics—including AU-ROC, accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity—permutation tests (Lindgren et al., 1996; Westerhuis et al., 2008) were conducted. Under the null hypothesis (H
0), which as-
sumes no association between features and labels (healthy or disease), sample labels were randomly permuted, and models were retrained on the permuted dataset. Evalu-ation metrics were calculated for each of the n = 1,000 permutations to generate a null distribution representing performance expected by chance. The observed metrics from the true (nonpermuted with correct group labels) data were then compared with the corresponding null distributions to derive P -values, calculated as:
P=1+()#
,metr ic metr ic
Nperm true
where metric ε {AUROC, Accuracy, Sensitivity, Speci-
ficity} and #(metric perm >> metric true) is the number of 
permutations in which the permuted performance metric equals or exceeds the observed value. The performance metrics were defined as follows:
AccuracyTP TN
TN FP TP FN=+
++ +,Lin et al.: HEALTH VIA MILK

