2025 Showcase Treatment of calf diarrhea Dave Renaud - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ft0oC4fFZ4I

Transcript:
(00:02) Okay, last but certainly not least, uh my colleague Dave Renault from population medicine at OBC. Uh to bracket, we began this morning with uh with calf nutrition and and dairy beef um optimization of of growth and and management for for both dairy and dairy beef calves. Um, and to to sort of put close those brackets, I've asked Dave to talk about some of the research from uh from he and his team um more on the therapeutic side of uh treating calves that get sick. Over to you.
(00:34) >> All right. Thanks, Stephen. It's nice to see Mike still at the back. So, thanks for sticking around, Mike, for this presentation. This is what it looks like when you don't collaborate with Mike Steel, actually. So, I know he had a thing with number six, I think, on the list, right, Mike, about collaborating with Dave Reno.
(00:49) This is what it looks like when you don't collaborate with Dr. Mike Steel. So, thanks for the laughter. It's good. Laughter's good, right? Especially the last presentation. Okay. So, why do we focus on calf diarrhea? Why is it important that we that we consider it and thanks for Mike for leaving the room. Diarrhea remains really the most common cause of of morbidity that we see in calves.
(01:13) And in the research that we've done when we look at and actually screen the calves for diarrhea do fecal consistency scoring we find that 65 to 85% of calves have at least one day with diarrhea. A massive number when you really think about it. We also know that there's tremendous long and short short-term and long-term impacts.
(01:34) So if we look at the short-term impacts with this calf here, calves that have diarrhea have a two times higher rate of mortality. They have a 1.7 times higher rate of respiratory disease and they reduce growth. If we follow these calves out to their lactation, they those those impacts really remain with those animals.
(01:54) So we lose about 325 kg of milk production and those animals are actually more likely to be called even once they reach their first lactation. So if you think about those impacts, it's cumitively a lot. And we've estimated that the impact for the average Canadian dairy farm is roughly about $28,000 a year. If you want to know where we made that up, um here's a dashboard, a link to the dashboard.
(02:15) I don't know if you can scan your QR code on that on the bottom. Um but one of my posttos, Curtis Soichic, I think I said that name right, Hannah. No, I didn't. Totally butchered it. Anyways, he made that dashboard for us and encourage you to check it out. It's uh interesting to look at and play around with the numbers.
(02:35) So when we think about this and we think about the impact, we really want to think about how do we prevent it from happening. Really, that's where our our our first starting point is. And I I talked about this actually last time at the Derek W seminar two years ago when I presented. We want to focus on colostrum.
(02:52) I'm sure Mike talked a lot about that this morning, the importance of colostrum management. We also want to make sure that we're feeding these calves extremely well. We want to make sure that we're putting them into a clean and dry environment, but we also want to make sure that we're treating these calves appropriately.
(03:05) It's really, really important, especially when we consider that if we have a sick calf, for every 100 calves that get sick with diarrhea, between 5 to 29 of those calves end up dying. So, we really need to provide pro prompt treatment and appropriate treatment to these animals to hopefully reduce the severity of this disease and reduce the incidence of them actually getting it.
(03:30) A question that's often asked or that I often get asked is does the therapy depend on the pathogen that they get infected with? So, maybe show of hands, do you think the pathogen whether it's coronairus, rotovirus, cryptosperidium, do you think that matters with calves that have diarrhea? Okay. Okay, some some hands, some nods.
(03:50) So you have these pathogens, they come into the calf. My fancy animation. Look at that. So cool. Shortens the villi and then we have our impact. So what we did in this study, one of my current master students, Olivia Gibson, is looking at this is we sampled calves right at the onset of diarrhea and we look for the main pathogens that are responsible for causing diarrhea.
(04:11) So cryptosperidium, parvam, coronavirus, rotovirus and also we looked at seinal as well through culture. And what we found was actually it didn't necessarily matter for the majority of diarrhea causing pathogens. So the rate or resolution of diarrhea, which is what this graph is showing you, I don't know if I can use this laser pointer here.
(04:29) Is that showing up? So we have 100% of calves that had diarrhea at the beginning. And you can look at the days to resolution on the bottom. So every time it drops down an inch, that's a calf that's resolved that bout of diarrhea. And what you can probably see with coronavirus, cryptospridium and and rotovirus is that resolution happens at the same rate.
(04:48) When we also look at their clinical signs, it also occurs at a at the same rate. For salmonella, it takes a little bit longer, but it wasn't statistically significant. It wasn't different. So the takeaway message is that if you have calves that are dealing with diarrhea, just treat them the same. You don't have to have a special treatment just because they're infected with one of these pathogens.
(05:06) In addition, what Olivia also looked at was she also looked at the number of pathogens that they're infected with. And similarly, no differences even if they're infected with one versus three pathogens. So, we can treat all the calves the exact same. So, if we see a calf that looks like this, and I'm sure many of you have maybe seen a calf that looks like this, what do you think are the number one thing that we want to consider? What should we give to this calf right away? fluid.
(05:36) >> We really need to give this calf fluid because they're losing a lot of fluid every single day they have diarrhea. And actually, one of Mike Steele's former uh PhD students, Juliet Wilms, we're working with her on this study. She actually measured how much fluid these calves are losing. And from a very kind of unpractical perspective, they're losing about 38 gram of fluid per kilo of body weight per day.
(06:02) And if we look at it on a on an average of a 40 kg calf, they're losing about 1.5 L every single day. 45 kg calf about 1.7 and 50 kg calf about 2 L of fluid. So clearly we want to replenish the fluid that's being lost. That's really really critical and we can reduce mortality quite substantially if we do that.
(06:22) So if we think about it from a practical perspective, what should we do? We have a calf with diarrhea. That calf appears standing and strong. Well, the simple solution is we give that calf oral electrolytes. Ideally, once per day, two liters once per day should be enough. But there are some challenges with the electrolytes that are available in the market.
(06:40) Currently, if you look at the Ontario context, there's about 20 different electrolytes that are available for calves and you ideally hope that they don't cause harm, but in some cases that may not be true. And this is also another cool study that Juliet did where she looked at a at a electrolyte that was hypertonic, meaning it had really high osmotic pressure.
(07:00) And then she looked at a control group that was just fed mostly water. And then looked at the differences in time to resolution between the two groups. So this is what it looked like on the control group. All the calves have resolved their bout of diarrhea by by 6 days after its onset. If we look at this hypertonic or electrolyte solution, it actually took took much longer for these calves to recover from the beta diarrhea.
(07:22) The diarrhea actually went on for long periods of time in some of these calves. So clearly the electrolyte actually does matter. And we there are some electrolytes that are on the market that probably do cause harm. And what we think about when we think about what's happening here, if we feed this calf the electrolyte, which is what the pink is showing, what's happening is there's so much osmotic pressure that there's actually fluid that's probably being pulled into the lumen of the gut, perhaps making diarrhea worse.
(07:47) So there are some pretty big question marks about what is the optimal electrolyte that we should be using for calf diarrhea. In addition, there's also questions about the level of sodium, the level of potassium and chloride. Those are lost in pretty high amounts when we look at calf diarrhea.
(08:03) And we also have question marks around the timing of when they actually need to receive electrolytes. So there's a lot of question marks about that and hopefully we'll be able to answer that in the next few years. So back to this, what do we do next? We have a calf that's weak. It's greater than 8% dehydrated.
(08:20) How do we tell that? We look at their eyes, their eye recession. The level of of dehydration is really highly correlated with the amount that their eyes are recessed into their head. can be a fairly practical indicator to tell you that that calf actually needs IV fluids to recover. So, give that calf IV fluids. Also, if you have a calf that's unable to stand, we also need to provide that calf IV fluids.
(08:42) Unfortunately, for a lot of calves that are unable to stand, they don't necessarily get that prompt treatment because often we might give up on that calf. We don't think that it's going to respond and we don't think that it's going to recover. So, here's just a example of a calf. One night I was on call with our our clinic room at field service called called out to one of our clients and saw a calf that looked like this.
(09:02) So totally down and out, cold ears, couldn't stand poor suckle reflex. This is what it looked like after I put IV fluids in it after 5 minutes sitting up. This is what it looked like after 15 minutes. It's really impressive the response that you can get when you give these cali IV fluids. So from a producer perspective, we don't want to give up on these calves.
(09:23) We want to continue to give these calf fluids to hopefully get them to recover. All right, what's the next thing we want to consider? So, we've talked about fluids. What else do we want to consider? It's a big room to play this guessing game, but we're going to do it anyway. What's the next thing we want to consider? Potentially anti-inflammatories.
(09:45) There's a lot of inflammation that happens in the in the intestine when we calves have diarrhea. There's also a lot of pain that's associated with it. You can talk to maybe some of our vet students at crypto cryptosperidium param. It is quite painful to get this get this condition. So there's pretty good evidence to suggest that we should give non-sterol anti-inflammatories right at the onset of diarrhea.
(10:07) And in these studies that have been done, two that have been done, one was one done in GUA 15 years ago or so, they found pretty big improvements when you give me moxyam in this case uh to calves at the onset of diarrhea. So they found that the calves resolve uh faster. They also improve their ability to consume grain, water, many of the other components and in some cases they found that they actually have a reduction in the level of antibiotic use in those animals as well.
(10:35) So using anti-inflammatory can certainly help. I'll spare you from the guessing game for this one, but the last consideration is antibiotics. It really should be a last resort, one that we don't give every calf with diarrhea and antibiotic. The reason that we do need to give it to some calves is what's happening when calves have diarrhea is they actually have some bacteria that's passing through the small intestine into uh the blood system.
(11:03) So we do have some bacteria that's moving in there typically ecoli if we look at it and we've also found in our group this is a a study by Louisa Zakia who's a PhD student of mine we also found that calves that have diarrhea have a more permeable gut so meaning that there's more bacteria that's able to pass through to the through to the uh blood system so we think about from a practical perspective who needs antibiotics it's very few cases of diarrhea that truly need it so only about 30% roughly ly of calves have bacteria, meaning they have bacteria in
(11:35) their bloodstream that necessitates antibiotic treatment. If we look at the main signs that we can use to judge whether a calf is bacteric or not, it's quite simple. We can see if that calf is bright and alert doesn't need antibiotics. A very low proportion of those calves actually have bacteria, only about 6%.
(11:53) If we have calves that have dull or marked depression, typically those calves require antibiotics because 71% of those calves have bacteria in their bloodstream that necessitates antibiotic therapy. Fever a bit of an unknown, only 24% and blood in the stool also a bit unknown as to whether or not calves would that need antibiotics.
(12:14) Largely a lot of this was in the past has been based on expert opinion telling us that we should or or should use this flowchart. we should base our antibiotic treatments on it. And no one's really evaluated what what we should do in terms of when we should provide antibiotics to calves. So what my current PhD student Louisa is working on is really using a selective algorithm to treat calves with diarrhea with antibiotics.
(12:38) So what we did in this case was we enrolled 108 calves right at the onset of diarrhea at a calf rearing facility. It's a really high disease challenge, really high disease burden. And what we did was we assigned the calves into two different groups. They either received antibiotics right at the onset of diarrhea. So 100% of them received a treatment with antibiotics or we used this selective approach that we built based on a study Louisa did but also uh other previous studies.
(13:03) So they had to have two or more signs to be treated with antibiotics. The signs we used were scleral injection. So it means like kind of injection of the of the veins or blood vessels around the eye. fever, unable to stand, sunken eyes, and also no sucker reflex. And the reason that we use those is often they're correlated with dullness or depression or dehydration.
(13:26) And we found that calves that are more dehydrated typically have higher levels of bacteria. So then what she did is we looked at the level of antibiotic use. Obviously our group at the top 100% received antibiotics. So that's good. Our treatment groups actually worked. And in the bottom group, we found 37% received antibiotics.
(13:46) This is probably a little bit higher than what I'd expect if we did it at a dairy farm to be honest because we had pretty high disease pressure, pretty high disease burden in this case. So if we looked at the results, first one being mortality, we actually found that calves that were on that evidence-based algorithm, so that selective therapy, actually had lower rates of mortality.
(14:06) So if you kind of scroll down to the end of our experiment at 90 days, about 5% died in our evidence-based group, whereas in our control group, it was closer to about 20% of calves that died. In addition, when we looked at rescue therapy, which is receiving an antibiotic treatment or an additional antibiotic treatment, we found the evidence-based group is about 5%.
(14:27) In our control group, which received all antibiotics at the onset, is about 20%. So about 16 percentage point higher risk of them receiving uh a rescue therapy with antibiotics. And then if we looked at respiratory disease, we actually found a difference here as well. So the evidence-based algorithm group about two days with respiratory disease and the control group had about four days with respiratory disease.
(14:50) So an elevation about two more days. So clearly if we're giving antibiotics to animals, there is a consequence especially if we're not giving at the right time. So, we need to be really smart and strategic about when we're providing antibiotics to ensure we're doing at the right time. The other important thing to consider is to ensure that we're providing the calves with the correct dose.
(15:10) If we're not providing the correct dose, we're underdosing or overdosing, there's a potential risk there um with with treating these calves. So, this is actually a summer student project. Zara Churon who's a who's a master or a DVM student uh worked for me this past summer and this was actually a project that she came up with herself.
(15:30) So in this case, what she did was she visited 16 dairy farms locally here around the G area and then she had a conversation with the producers. Specifically, she asked them what drugs are they using to treat diarrhea. What drugs are they using to treat respiratory disease? Then she asked them what dose would they use to treat that calf uh for respiratory disease or diarrhea.
(15:52) And we evaluated five randomly selected calves for each disease. So 10 in total. And then what we did was we actually weighed the calves those calves and we calculated what is the correct dose that we should provide to these animals. So we look at calf diarrhea and we look at the percent difference or the calculated difference between the two.
(16:13) We found that on average producers are using about 30% more than what is on label or what is the recommended dose. If we look at those that are underdo or overdosing about 56 57% of those under overdosed by more than 10% and 19% underdosed um by more than 10%. If we looked at respiratory disease on average the dose that they provided was 19% higher than it needed to be.
(16:39) We had 44% that overdosed and 32% that underdosed. So clearly I think there's a little bit of work that we can do here to ensure that we're providing the right dose for these animals. So, how do we do that? And how do we do it practically? Well, we could go out and we could weigh every single calf.
(16:57) But practically, I've worked with enough farmers and veterinarians myself to say this probably isn't going to work. But potentially, what we could use is we could use could use a whey tape. A way tape is something practical, something small that we can bring to individual calves that can really help us determine the correct dose.
(17:15) If I was presenting this to you two years ago, I probably would have told you actually way tapes suck and we shouldn't use them. And we actually did a study to prove that whey tapes suck. They don't actually, which is a bit of surprise to me. So what we did was we went out and we measured a thousand calves.
(17:32) We measured them at three different dairy farms and also at a calf ringing facility. And to my surprise, gez, that looks pretty pretty good, doesn't it? So that so it actually works pretty good. It's a very practical thing when we compare a weigh scale to a way tape. Another common concern that we run into with these weigh tapes is that it differs depending on the observer.
(17:53) So what we did for each one of those calves is we had two people weigh those animals. And much to my surprise, that's also pretty darn good, isn't it? So almost a straight line. So I think using weight tapes can be a really practical way that we can evaluate the dosing that we're providing to calves to make sure that we're providing the right dose to these animals.
(18:13) A final consideration that and one that we've recently researched is the utility of using colostrum. And maybe Mike covered this this morning. Did he, Stephen? No. That's good because he told me he threatened me. He might. Um, so I'm glad he didn't. So colostrum is is one of the things that we've looked to look to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of it.
(18:32) You might be thinking, well, why colostrum? These calves when they get diarrhea, they're two weeks of age or older. Why are we doing that? There's actually pretty good evidence in the human literature that boine colostrum can serve as a way to reduce the severity of diarrhea. So we thought a while ago when Javi Carter was doing her master's degree, why don't we try this out and see can we get efficacy in calves? So this is a study that Javi did also at a calf ringing facility.
(19:00) We enrolled these calves right at the onset of diarrhea. We enrolled them into three different groups. They're on their control group, eight feedings of their regular milk diet. And then we had a combination group that was 50% colostrum replacer, 50% milk replacer that was fed to these calves. We had a short-term colostrum group, which was four feedings of this mixture, then back onto milk.
(19:20) And then we had our long-term group, which was our eight feedings of this mixture back onto milk. These calves also received electrolytes. They also received Moxicam at the onset of diarrhea because we didn't want that influencing our results. We followed these calves for 56 days and and here are some of the results that we found.
(19:40) So overall, we found that calves in that long-term group, so eight consecutive feedings of that mixture, resolved diarrhea about 2 days sooner. They also gained more weight over the 56-day period, about 100 grams per day more. We didn't find any differences in antibiotic use. We didn't find any statistical differences in mortality. But if you look at it, we had 14% of calves die in the control group and none that died in the long-term colostrum therapy group.
(20:05) So perhaps shedding a little bit of light that we can use alternative therapies for diarrhea beyond our traditional means that we've used in the past. One of the things that I think we're we're missing in this conversation so far is we really want to make sure that we're identifying disease as early as possible.
(20:23) All these therapies are for not if we're not identifying them right at the onset of diarrhea. So, how do we do that? If I went out and asked producers to go and do fecal consistency scoring, which my grad students do a lot of, probably not going to happen realistically. So, we have to use other metrics. We have to use other means to detect disease in these calves.
(20:44) One of the things that one of my current PhD students, Alison Welk, is working on is looking at drinking behavior and also looking at activity in these animals to see, can we utilize this to flag cavs that are at high risk to develop disease. So this is a study that she did at the research station um the Laura or Ontario Dairy Research and Innovation Center.
(21:03) And what we did was we looked at calves looking at healthy those that developed mild diarrhea which are those that had just diarrhea, no clinical signs of dehydration. And we also looked at calves that that had severe diarrhea. So those are calves that had diarrhea with additional clinical signs indicating they're dehydrated.
(21:23) And then we looked at their milk intake from the 3 days prior to 7 days following that bout of diarrhea. So we look at healthy calves, you can see a bit of a flatline trend. It's increasing through time. As the calves get older, they typically drink more milk. So that makes sense. When we looked at mild diarrhea, we found a drop on the day that they developed diarrhea, one day following.
(21:44) And then if we looked at those calves that were destined to develop severe diarrhea, they actually dropped about one day before they showed any clinical signs of diarrhea, before they really had that abnormal feal consistency that I spoke about earlier. So if we shift over and we look at the number of steps per day, there are some new technologies that are becoming available that are making it easier for our producers to monitor activity on the calves.
(22:09) So this is a a commercially available uh program that we used on these calves to look at the number of steps and their activity that was taken per day. So we look at healthy calves again very similar trend where it's increasing slightly through time. If we look at mild diarrhea, not a big difference. There is a significant difference on day two after they showed clinical signs of diarrhea, but not really that major.
(22:31) But if we look at calves that when were destined to develop severe diarrhea, we found a pretty big drop on the day that they developed diarrhea. So clearly we can use some of this precision technology, whether it's monitoring the steps that they're taking to per day, monitoring their milk intake to hopefully flag cavs that are at risk to develop these diseases.
(22:51) And that's exactly what we did is we created an alarm that was indicating these calves were at high risk to develop disease. The next question with this research is, well, what do we do with this information? Lots of producers have lots of alarms that they have to deal with on a daily basis from the robot, automated milk feeder, all the different technologies that they're using.
(23:12) So, we want to have it some sight of some sort of action item for uh these alarms. So, that's what Allison also worked on. We enrolled 88 calves at the Ontario Dairy Research and Innovation Center. These calves were on automated milk feeders and they triggered an alarm uh when their drinking speed and also when their milk intake dropped over a 2-day period.
(23:36) What we did when they generated that alarm was we looked at could we use colostrum in that case non-anibiotic alternative something that most producers have readily available on their farm to see could does it really make a difference. So our groups were one liter of colostrum replacer fed each day for four consecutive days just once per day and then a milk replacer group which was balanced on energy because we didn't want that to be different between the groups.
(24:02) And what we found was some pretty interesting results. So specifically if we looked at growth after they were enrolled in the study. So after they generated that alarm we found that calsar in the colostrum replacer group gained about 2 kg more over that week. By the end of the third week or the second week they weighed 3 kilos more.
(24:23) So we found an important difference in terms of body weight gain. We believe that was largely driven by the fact that they consume more milk. So in this graph we have the amount of milk that they're consuming per day days after enrollment on the bottom and overall calves that were in the cluster replacer group consumed about a liter more of milk over that over that period.
(24:43) In addition these calves took more steps per day. They also received fewer treatments when we looked at Moxyam. They also were less likely to be assisted to the feeder. So the mechanisms for why it sounds really interesting I think hopefully to to this audience that we can use colostrum to these high-risisk calves.
(25:03) The reason why is a little bit unknown to be honest and something that we need to dig into a little bit more mechanistically to understand what's happening in these animals. It's probably a combination of all the components of colostrum, lactopherin, oliosaccharides, all those different components that are really helping these calves to respond better or recover better when they have a bout of diarrhea is what we think.
(25:25) Another thing that Allison explored is also using NSAIDs like Molux Cam at the onset or when they when they trigger an alarm. So the exact same uh breakdown on automated calf feeders. They triggered an alarm when they had a reduction in the amount of milk they're consuming and also reduction in their drinking uh speed.
(25:46) The two different groups we enrolled them into was a Moxyam group. So we injected them with Moxyam or we injected them with a saline solution. Exact same parameters we evalued in this study. What we found in this study was when it came to percent that were treated with electrolytes, we found that those that received Moxcanam were much less likely to receive an electrolyte therapy comparatively to those that were in the saline group.
(26:09) So almost double uh the amount that received electrolytes in the saline group compared to the Moxcanam group. When we looked at the number of steps that they took per day, I apologize on this graph. I realize it's a little bit skewed, but those in the Moxcan group took more steps comparatively to those that were in the sailing group.
(26:26) We looked at other things like diarrheation. It was very similar. We didn't find any differences in feeding behavior, any differences in growth. But perhaps this indicates that the calves that received Moxim maybe had a reduction in the severity of disease indicated by the by less severe dehydration or the number that were treated with electrolytes, but also a reduction in the number or an increase in the number of steps that they're taking per day.
(26:48) So maybe these calves are simply recovering a little bit better as a result. So for some takeaway messages from this presentation, hopefully what you understood from it is that diarrhea is really common. It's really the most common disease that we face in our young calves. So 67 to over 80% of calves receive it. It's also quite costly.
(27:08) The average dairy farmer in Canada is losing about $28,000 every year as a result of it. We know that fluid therapy is really the most important thing that we need to provide to calves. Absolutely essential. But what we don't know is really the best electrolyte formulation we pro provide to these animals to ensure we're not causing harm because in a lot of cases there are some electrolytes that that probably are doing that.
(27:31) Anti-inflammatories certainly help these calves to recover better whether it's at the onset of diarrhea or the onset of our feeder alarm. We certainly found that these calves are able to eat better. They're able to take more steps and maybe have reduction in severity. We also know that antibiotics are really only needed in seldomly in cases of diarrhea.
(27:51) And in fact, if we treated every calf with an antibiotic at the onset of diarrhea, it's going to actually have negative effects on that animal long term. Early detection certainly can change the outcome. So if we look at milk intake, we look at the number of steps or activity that they taken per day, clearly that's going to help us to detect these calves sooner.
(28:10) So hopefully we can be have more action. And the final thing I wanted to leave everyone with is that although we talked about treatment here, that's where we spend a bit of time focusing on prevention is really still critical. We want to prevent these cases from happening because if we can do that, we really don't need to have conversations about all the stuff we just did.
(28:29) So that it's always fun to present to audiences and I'm lucky enough to present to many different places around the world, but it really is the students that make it happen. I see there's lots of students that are here today. um you guys are really the the people that make the action here and make make Derrick G really what Dererick Goff is.
(28:46) So thank you all for your hard work. Also like to thank all the sponsors of the research that that funded the the data I presented as well. And with that I'm happy to take any questions you might have. Thanks for listening.