2025 Showcase - Feeding calves - Mike Steele - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TTnfyL4MNtE

Transcript:
(00:00) Our first speaker is Mike Steele. Mike is well known to many of you, professor in the department of animal biosciences and at at OAC. Um he's known particularly for his uh calf research as as well as other aspects of applied uh nutrition and metabolism. And so Mike's going to kick things off um talking about uh new approaches for feeding cal dairy and dairy beef calves.
(00:30) Welcome, Mike. [snorts] [applause] >> Thanks. It's a pleasure to be here. I'm going to be talking about some of the research that we're doing in our lab. So, it will just be more of the new stuff that we've uh been reporting over the last 3 to four years. We're about to report. I'm very fortunate to come to G.
(00:54) I came to G 7 years ago. This is a pi one of our pictures about two years into the program of calf research and we it's really exciting to be with this critical mass of calf researchers. Uh it's always been fun working with Dave Renault um and I think and also Charlotte Windard, Trevor Dere, there's so many other people doing calf research with our team and we're consistently publishing over 40 papers a year.
(01:20) I'm really really proud of everything that's been developing out of this and even some of the players in here are now professors in the universities uh around the world. So it's really cool what's evolved. So what our lab consistently has been studying for the last 10 years is this idea of early life programming. So I think of a calf as a ball rolling down a hill and depending on how you manage this animal will ultimately impact the future phenotype. Okay.
(01:46) So we've been studying a lot with respect to colostrum, a little bit of prenatal uh but mainly around this milk and weaning center. Now I want to look at this concept a little bit more deeply before I get into my presentation. So there's lots of opportunity in the calf world to do uh prenatal work. Not a lot has been done.
(02:06) I think other species where this developmental plasticity or this opportunity to change the future phenotype is always greater. But not a lot of research in the dairy world, lots in the beef world though. But most calf research is during this pre-weening period and as the heer eventually matures into a cow, your developmental plasticity will decrease.
(02:23) So when you're older, let's say like Dave Kelton, okay, there's no changing Dave Kelton. The only plasticity he has is plastic surgery. And he's not that kind of guy in my opinion. At least that's what I think. Okay. Sorry Dave. I don't even know where you are, but I saw that you're here. Anyways, so this is a concept that I want you to be aware of.
(02:45) Um, and I want you to choose basically based on uh the feedback. I want you to tell me what I should present. So I go around and people complain that I present the same thing. So this is all up to you. Okay. So what do you want to hear based on your reactions? Prenatal. That's dead silent. Okay. All right.
(03:04) Got the feedback. You don't want to hear prenatal. Okay. Colostrum. >> Okay. We got some colostrum here. Okay. Milk. >> Yes. >> Yeah. All right. Okay. Good. Because I have some exciting slides about that. [laughter] >> Weaning. >> I think uh Clash of Milk might be weaning, but weaning is third. Dairy beef. >> Okay. All right. All right. We got it.
(03:29) There's one more. I'm not sure if I'm mentally prepared to get into it, but it's what is it like to collaborate with Dave Ren? No. So that's a [applause] uh I'll think about this through the course of the presentation. I'm not sure. It's a very dark place and I'm not sure if I feel uh comfortable enough to get into that today, but we'll see.
(03:51) We'll see how this presentation evolves. So colostrum, okay, milk, uh and then also dairy beef. So yeah, colostrum is very exciting. We've been studying colostrum actually since uh day one when I started a via professor and it's really fascinating because it's not just all about amunoglobulins. There's so many other different components that we've been trying to study a lot.
(04:12) So we've been focusing uh more so on the carbohydrate fractions or we call them oligosaccharides and also fats. But we have recently been kind of taking steps back and trying to figure out how colostrum is actually formed. Now, we actually don't know how colostrum is formed. We call this colostrogenesis. There's so many different factors.
(04:33) We know that parody has a big uh influence. We know that season, dry uh period length, calf sex as well, previous 305 day milk. There looks like nutrition may, although there's a lot of conflicting results depending on the study can impact this. So, there's many different factors that can modify it, but we really don't know how this works.
(04:55) So, I'm very fortunate at the University of G. I've always had very uh talented um PhDs and students. They're all smarter than I am. That's one of my criteria for selection. And uh one of them is Dr. Amanda Fischer Tulus who just graduated from our lab in uh September. So, she's always been really fascinated in this question missing because we are missing this fundamental information regarding the process of how claustrogenesis occurs.
(05:24) So I go, "Yeah, that's really smart." Uh, she's so smart all the time. Uh, can you maybe make an analogy? And she has this analogy that she always has is, "Mike, okay, it's like it we've got a house, all the wiring is there, we just don't know how to turn on the lights." So I think that this is a very good analogy and this is what she's been focusing on.
(05:42) And she's teamed up with uh other students in my lab. So, another student, Kaylee Klein, who's doing her PhD, and Julia, who just finished her MSC, and they did a really intensive study at the ODRC, the Ontario Dairy Research Center, otherwise known as Allora Dairy, uh, collecting uh, milk from every single quarters or colostrum.
(06:03) We did biopsies. We did ultrasound to look at memory, uh, blood flow, things of this natures. Here's some biopsies, and here's some secretions as well that we were collecting. So a very intensive study because yeah we have studies showing how dietary interventions or different management strategies can impact it but we're really just guessing about the mechanisms because we don't understand enough about claustrogenesis.
(06:28) So here's some of the preliminary graphs and this comes from Amanda's uh PhD just looking at serum IGG here in the red and then this is the secretions uh that we were collecting from our cows prepppartum just showing you that IGG is actually a lot higher here uh about a week before the cow gives birth but it is inclining here even up to five 6 weeks it's continually increasing so lots of decrease within the blood we don't know if this IGG in the cow's blood is actually ending up within uh the cow's alvoli or the colostrum.
(07:05) That's still to be ter determined. A lot of people think it does. Uh but we notice that it peaks about a week before, but it's continually increasing even weeks before this cow gives birth and then it goes down presumably through dilution with lactose. Anyways, there's also this increase of 91% from 6 weeks before partition all the way up to one week before.
(07:29) So this is a memory tissue one week before the cow gives uh birth and you can see we stain this in red for IGG and it's completely lit up. Okay. So there's huge stores with of IGG. It's all there even a week in advance. So we know a lot of these uh factors with respect to claustrogenesis of IGG are happening before uh this last week of partrition.
(07:52) But other factors uh that we looked at or other bioactive factors such as igosaccharides. So they're the natural prebiotics that this cow produces uh do not increase until the last week uh right before partition. So all these bioactives have a purpose, but they're all being uh increased at different time points prepartum. So I think the more we learn about this, the more that we can somehow learn how to manu manipulate this more to increase a lot of these very healthful bioactive factors.
(08:25) We've also have been doing just studies on the tissue that we collected from these cows too. So this is just looking at the structure of the tissue. The alvolar size doesn't really increase until parturition as well as the number of memory epithelial cells per alvolar. It's not really increasing until that day of parturation.
(08:42) And the structure really not a lot of changes until day zero and plus seven here. And then with respect to cell proliferation or growth, it's uh slowing down as soon as this cow gives birth. But we do have this increase right about 7 days before partition as you can see here. So this is really good. We we understand that although we don't see the structural differences, these cells are still growing and also their apoptosis or their cell death is decreasing through the dry cow period.
(09:13) So this is all work from the same study just showing us when these cellular pathways are being turned on and off. We also have some molecular pathways we're looking into as well. But it looks like if we just look at the highle structure, we're really missing a lot of uh these biological mechanisms that we can probe and potentially manipulate to improve colostrum quantity and quality in the future.
(09:36) other uh really interesting findings and these are all papers that will be submitted in 2026 is that uh they also uh looked at memory plasma flow. Okay, so we can actually assess using ultrasound how much blood is going to the mammary gland in this flow and and calculate that rate. What's really interesting is that there isn't a true increase until parturition but there is a period here which is very interesting to look at and it shows that if you have memory blood flow it it can be higher in cows and they use actually more acetate
(10:12) which is what the memorary gland is using and more glucose as well. If they do that right around this period of minus8 minus 6 and they're not really shutting down their memorary gland, there's some indication that they produce less colostrum volume. So this is kind of interesting. More evidence that things that are happening even before this cow is really in a a true dry period where these cells are shut off that could potentially be impacting things right here with respect to claustrogenesis.
(10:43) So interesting findings. I'm so happy that these students did this study. It was a lot of work and we couldn't have done it without our dairy research center in being able to uh actually do this work. So, we've also uh look at colostrum basics a lot and here's some of the key recommendations that I think that we're challenging right now.
(11:03) There's two that really uh jump out at me that I think need to be updated and uh of course we need to clean colostrum. We can pasteurize it. We should be feeding colostrum. I think as close to one hour as possible. I think that's uh everyone agrees on that. But I think the quality and quantity we should be revisiting and I I would uh recommend even increasing from 22 bricks to a 25 bricks and from 50 g all the way to 70 g as our criteria.
(11:33) I think that we have cows that can do this. We're learning more about how we can actually manipulate this. But I think this this is the new way of looking at feeding colostrum is feeding a lot higher quality and not just accepting 22 and 50 g per liter. And then quantity 10% in the first 12 hours. I think we can update that.
(11:53) I think we can feel very comfortable going up to 12% in two meals. Okay. So 8% and 4% of birth body weight. I think that we can all agree in the literature that that looks like it's a suitable amount. Although there's a lot of uh controversy in that topic at this point in our industry, but this is why we do research. So in this study, this is a recent uh study that I collaborated with Sabina man who led this study at Cornell University.
(12:19) So we do compete against Cornell as well, but yeah, the good ones we'll collaborate with and Sabina Man is I think one of the one of the best ones there. But anyways, we looked at the different percentages of 6 8 10 and 12% of the first meal of colostrum. And just looking at IGG, there is a benefit. It appears to be uh feeding more up to 12%.
(12:42) Yes, you will get this increase compared to the uh 8% as well as the 6%. But really it looks like around here is pretty suitable with respect to IGG. These are very very high levels of IGG in circulation of these calves. But the AEA the more that you feed in this particular study with respect to volume it does go down.
(13:06) So it does look that and the AEA stands for apparent efficiency of absorption. So how much of this IGG ends up in circulation. So it does go down but it looks like that this 8 to 10% is kind of a sweet spot. We don't want to go too much. It looks like there's some discomfort. the calves were actually kicking at their bellies a little bit more at 12% in this study, but it looks like somewhere between 8 and 10% is where we should be.
(13:31) Now, we're going to be uh looking at what is a second meal. Should the second meal be 4%, should it be even higher? That's some of the research we'd like to be doing uh next year, and we're most like we're starting to plan those studies for the spring and summer. So kind of interesting data and I I think that 8 to 10% is uh where we should be with respect to that data at least my interpretation of that data.
(13:54) We also look at colostrum quality a lot and this is maternal colostrum that we're looking at here. So we fed in this particular study 30 g of maternal colostrum IGG 60 g and 90 g here all maternal. And it's really interesting because our apparent efficiency of absorptions in this study were actually the same.
(14:15) So these calves were actually receiving 350 g of IGG in this particular treatment here and we can still keep on elevating the amount of uh IGG that we see in circulation. But the question I receive from farmers a lot is what if I don't have good colostrum? What can I do? So in this study we enriched the 30 g to 60 g and using a dried colostrum source.
(14:38) And the source that we used was from the SECL company. And in this particular case, it did increase the amount of IGG in circulation when we did that. However, uh when we enriched the 60 g to 90 g, we didn't have this elevation. Yes, numerical, maybe there's something else within the colostrum that could have had a benefit.
(15:00) We just looked at IGG, but it appears like there's not a benefit when you already have pretty good colostrum trying to enrich it with respect to IGG levels. So I think enriching lowquality colostrum uh based on some of this research is uh to your advantage. So I think feeding as much IGG as possible especially if you have this lowquality colostrum is really important.
(15:21) But it really made me think more about our recommendations with dairy animals too because not that long ago we were actually saying a dairy cash should fed 100 g of IGG. That was about 20 years ago. Then we moved to about 200 grams of IGG in that first meal. That was about 10 years ago. Now we're talking about 300 right now.
(15:42) So I think that we should continually increase. I think most cows produce around 400 500 g of IGG within their first milking. So perhaps getting it closer to these values. I don't like to admit this in front of a dairy group, but I do do beef research from time to time. I can't resist uh this research center that we have.
(16:00) It's totally amazing. And we do milk these uh beef animals. Shockingly, they're more tame than a 2-year-old Holstein. However, we do give them oxytocin. So maybe that has something to do with it in these studies. But what was really fascinating, and I'm not I'm not going to go into the results of some of these studies, but just looking at the IGG levels of cows and calves together, we actually didn't have a calf under 40 g of IGG at 24 48 hours after receiving uh colostrum.
(16:30) So you don't see these numbers in the dairy world. We did studies uh feeding 5 g, 2.5 g. So very small levels of IGG. Um and this is typically what they're receiving in nature around 250 to 500 g total in these treatments. But really there's a big difference from what we see in actual nature and what's actually happening on farms.
(16:54) Now, these are quite a bit lower with respect to AEAs compared to normal, but this is happening all the time on farms is that we're just not feeding enough colostrum. I think the quality and the quantity uh really needs to be focused on. And then I think this graph just really opens up your eyes to what actually uh happens if we actually could have a calf uh nurse from a cow. So, lots to do there.
(17:16) And we plan on doing another round of colostrum research. We just finished a 5-year NSIRC grant and we plan to do another four years of colostrum research uh starting in 2026. Another area that I'm just going to focus on briefly is we also use colostrum outside the first day of life and we've been looking at using it for a treatment of diarrhea.
(17:38) Dave Renault will talk about that towards the end of the day. But we also like this extended colostrum feeding and it just kind of mimics what the cow naturally does is producing this transition milk which is full of goodies but largely we don't really feed it sometimes just because we're so focused on IGG. So we did this study on a commercial farm where we fed two colostrum uh meals.
(17:59) We fed a colostrum replacer in this study and we had uh one group switched to a milk replacer. One group we had a transition of 50/50 colostrum and milk replacer for two days after the colostrum then they got milk replacer and then another group just received 10% of their meal as colostrum replacer for the first 14 uh days of life and then another group that was kind of like the super max the 50/50 as well as this 10%.
(18:27) So we thought that obviously the more colostrum that you feed the better it will be for the animal but we this is why we do research on commercial farms. uh farm was having a disease outbreak at the time. A lot of the cows were getting sick obviously as you can see from the odds of remaining healthy but these three treatments with the extended colostrum feeding uh they got their first illness later on in life and the survivability there was a salmonella Dublin outbreak during the time of this study was better in all three of these treatments compared to
(18:56) the control treatment. So it looks like, and there's other studies showing very similar things, that if we feed colostrum or different types of nutrients in this first week or two of life, we can uh have accelerated growth, sometimes we can have more development, we can have uh less health outcomes that are uh showing up in our research.
(19:17) And we're calling this concept phase feeding, which is everywhere in the swine industry uh in many in poultry industry. It's a very common knowledge. So, it's a new term that we're uh floating around. Not to be confused with precision feeding, which is another way of basically using sensor technology to deliver different uh products.
(19:38) So, for example, the diarrhea treatments that we've been using colostrum for, that would be more precision feeding. So based on alarms from a sensor technology in a feeder uh we can determine if a calf is going down in drinking speed or overall overall intake. Then we can deliver this. So Kristen Edwards did uh really nice research.
(19:59) This was on a commercial farm. It was a really abrupt weeding off high milk in this particular study, but she added colostrum during the step down and just a very small amount actually 125 grams per day, not that much. And it actually had a pretty big impact after weaning on growth. So it looks like potentially you have a lot of gut health issues during weaning.
(20:21) Maybe this colostrum is speeding up the recovery of the gut and these animals can actually grow more. So difference is close to 3 kg just a couple weeks after which is a bit pretty big uh difference. So Kristen Edwards is a new professor that just joined our uh department of population medicine.
(20:38) It's a very strong background in veterinary medicine. Uh is doing dairy and beef work here at the University of G. So that's it. I think we need to change topics now. So I heard some milk screams from Giselle. She seemed uh very excited about milk. So let's go to milk if that's all right. We got to deliver what Jiselle wants. Okay.
(20:58) So, milk feeding is something I've been studying forever and uh I really fascinated with feeding higher levels of milk without transport in early life. Okay, if you have transport in early life, it's a different ballgame. You have to eventually ramp them up on milk. But I think even in the first week of life, and these calves are 4 days old there in this particular um video, they're consuming 10 L of milk.
(21:23) Uh so if you feed more milk, especially in early life, so this is just a simple study, five versus 10 lers of pasteurized milk, they're going to grow more, okay? More nutrients when they don't eat starter. They don't eat significant amounts of starter in the first 3 weeks of life to contribute to growth.
(21:40) So if you don't deliver the milk, you're not going to have the growth. This is shockingly a concept that we've been debating for the last 50 years in dairy nutrition, but I think it's pretty straightforward. uh if you want more growth, if that's your objective, you need to feed more milk. So, we've been studying more about the long-term consequences because we all know that average daily gain is associated with lifetime milk production.
(22:03) So, we want to learn more about this. So, we partnered uh from a study from Cornell University. Again, we we are open to collaboration. We will just beat you at ADSA. Okay? Uh that's the way we operate. So this is with uh Mike Vanberg and this is a very simple study comparing high levels of milk versus low and here's the organ masses from this study.
(22:26) So if you feed higher levels of milk close to an ad libitum you're going to have a higher uh liver. Okay. So even as a percentage of body weight uh it is still significant. You have a bigger kidney. But what's really intriguing and what people think is uh really the mechanism behind all this is that the mammary gland is growing alometrically during this stage.
(22:47) And as you can see the overall mass is a lot larger and the paracya tissue. So these are the cells that are going to eventually produce the milk are even larger with respect to a proportion here. So you are actually adding quite a bit of fat to the fat pad of the memorary gland, but you're getting a lot of paracya tissue.
(23:06) And this is still a hypothesis. This is what people think might be related to this. Still a hypothesis. So we took this tissue and we did a bunch of gene expression and we developed a lot more hypotheses and we focused on the fat and memorary gland because they were the most bioactive here. So we published some papers in this area just basically trying to give us more pointers in how this could be affecting the animal early in life.
(23:31) But again, this is from dissection data right before weaning. And this is the biggest problem in calf research is that we don't follow animals for a long time. And we're quite limited with our interpretations because I could do everything I want in 60 days, but does it have an impact of the cow? We don't really know sometimes.
(23:49) So this is a study that was an ideation 15 years ago. This was uh before I was an academic and this is uh something we planned. This was done in the Netherlands where we fed 8 L of milk at 150 g per liter versus four and we fed this to initially 50 cals per treatment. So a lot of these studies are retrospective looking at associations.
(24:11) So we actually had a treatment from the beginning and uh we did it on one commercial farm uh just outside of Boxmir in the Netherlands and it was in collaboration with Trrow Nutrition uh because I was currently working uh for Trout Nutrition when we were designing this study. So feed more milk the calves grow more. Okay, but also their metabolism is completely different.
(24:32) So the metabolome right before these treatments is of course similar, but just at day 49 after receiving high and low milk, we have really big differences in energy metabolism, protein metabolism, and also liver changes. So we're getting a whole bunch of metabolites being turned on and off. And this persists even as heers as well as lactating cows.
(24:55) Even their insulin sensitivity with the glucose tolerance tests we were doing were still different in these animals as they aged. So it looks like this early life treatment had some physiological differences. I know I tell I show this to farmers and they say we don't care about this. We want to see the milk production data.
(25:15) So yes, here's the milk production data from the first lactation. So they actually produced more fat. Their feed conversion was lower though but their fat was higher. Okay. And this continued as you went to the second lactation here uh where their actual uh fat corrected milk was a lot higher and actually their feed efficiency was also higher at that time point too and their overall fat.
(25:40) So this continued even in the third lactation there was an increase in fat as well. So it's quite interesting that something that we're doing in early life can have an impact. But I think the most interesting results and let's keep them with a grain of salt because we did have limited numbers of animals here.
(25:58) But the survivability of these animals fed elevated plains of milk nutrition was higher in this particular study. So it was a commercial farm. It was up to them when they were culling. They didn't know any of the treatments. So this is just some of the natural data that was uh produced through uh this entire study.
(26:14) in addition to the milk production data. I think very telling. Now, it's really risky to do these studies. It took us over 10 years to complete this study. I can't really go to DFO and say, "Hey, Robert, give me a couple million dollars and I'll report back in uh 2035." I can only imagine what the board would say.
(26:31) Okay. So, we but we still need to strive to do these studies. They're really hard to do, but I think a very big limitation. And we've been doing a lot of these studies in the Netherlands, and we have a lot of students there. Here's uh two students. One's graduated a year and a half ago, Juliet Wilms uh and she works for trial nutrition as a scientist as well as uh Wanita at Chava Mona who's currently completing her PhD who's a DFO scholar.
(26:57) So one of the last DFO scholars is Wanita. So she's finishing her PhD this year but she lives full-time in the Netherlands right now as she's uh going to be a research scientist for them. But they've been uh not just looking at total amount of milkfed. They've been really focused on the actual composition, which is really interesting because when you really compare milk and milk replacer, and I'm just looking at milk replacer on average, not all these milk replacers are like this, but on average, they're about 50% of the fat compared to what you would have in whole
(27:29) milk in a lot of cases. Okay. Also, the lactose is a lot higher. Okay. It's probably the ingredients we're putting in way permeates, they're going in. Probably something to do with that. Of course, the ash is also higher too because we have a lot of byproducts. Okay, but the osmos will also be higher in a milk replacer compared to whole milk.
(27:50) Now, I'm not against milk replacers here. In fact, I recommend milk replacers on certain farms if I think it makes sense. I'm not anti-milk replacer, but I think we need to acknowledge that we have these big differences here. And uh work by Juliet Wilms has shown that if you increase the hypertonic nature of a milk replacer, it will increase gut permeability.
(28:10) So if you feed more lactose or sugars, you're going to open up the gut. And also uh high lactose milk replacers impacts insulin sensitivity as well. And we'll get to that data. So they did studies looking at ad libitum uh actual feeding of these milk replacers. So a high fat that's actually not even close to a whole milk.
(28:30) A whole milk would be over 30% but we're trying to get up there. And then the high lactose. And what uh any kind of calf researcher would say is that these calves aren't going to be eating enough starter if they're being fed high fat. So what we found is that that's actually not the case in this particular study. There was no differences in starter intake.
(28:49) They did actually consume more milk because they have a lower energy density. Okay, if you correct for energy and you look at metabizable energy intake, there is actually no differences. So, it's kind of cool how the calf can actually regulate its total energy intake. And another thing we were told is that your calves on high fat are not going to grow very well.
(29:13) And this wasn't the case as as we can see from these uh 12 weeks at 120 kg is a really big calf. And also some of these uh average daily gains are really high and kind of unprecedented in journal of dairy science of above one. That's very rare to see. So I think that that's certainly not the case and I think that we need to update this.
(29:33) Also uh we did other studies looking at controlled feeding levels. So not ad libitum but still elevated levels but just in the first week of life and it does affect insulin sensitivity. Uh we'd like to follow this for later on but it does reduce insulin sensitivity when we have this higher level of lactose going into a milk replacer.
(29:54) Again this is only in the first week of life but what does this mean later on? Does this affect the cow during the transition period? I don't think we really know. So we know that this is uh affecting not only insulin sensitivity but even how the meal actually moves from the abom to the small intestine. Then also the physiology of this animal is totally different.
(30:16) In this study, the highfat calves uh receiving this highfat milk replacer actually gain more in that first week, which is contrary to everything that's really published in the literature when you look at the entire uh pre-weening period. So, different results there. Also, like their physiology, their liver weight is totally different too.
(30:35) Okay, if you dissect everything and you look at the genes or the metabolites in every single organ, they're going to be different even uh if they have similar average daily gain, it looks like in a lot of these comparisons. So, we've been looking at many different comparisons. We've been looking at comparisons of high fat versus whole milk, high lactose versus uh milk, and high protein versus milk.
(30:59) It looks like even if their average daily gains are very similar, you have a completely different u phenotype in this animal or we call it a metabolic fingerprint. They're totally different. So, we're trying to study what does that actually mean? Maybe it doesn't mean anything. That is possible, but we're wondering, okay, they have similar average daily gains.
(31:17) Does this affect their physiology at least later on in life? So, we've been following animals during the pre-weened period, but we also try to follow them as heers as well. This is one study versus uh milk replacer and whole milk which was the same macrona nutrient composition. And what we noted here is that the calves fed the whole milk treatment.
(31:37) So this was a dried whole milk, the exact same composition of fat and protein and lactose. They actually had uh a lot more for stomach and also some small intestinal weight and also some surface area of absorption. So their villi were a lot more developed when they were receiving this uh milk this whole milk versus a milk replacer and also their uh composition of tissue with respect to fatty acids was completely different as well.
(32:05) And when we look at it and you compare uh not just the amount of fat within a milk replacer but the fatty acid composition of it you'll notice that it's quite different. And what we've been focusing on a lot is C4C6. So these short and mediumchain fatty acids which aren't in a lot of milk replacers. So we wanted to add them to a milk replacer and see what happened.
(32:26) So what we did is we had ad limitum feeding of a milk replacer one control then one with a C4C6. And this was done by Juliet Wilms. This was all done in the Netherlands. And we noted that these calves contrary to what you would think actually consume more milk. And actually these calves, which goes against every single rule that you would see within a textbook of calf nutrition with higher milk consumed higher starter.
(32:53) So that's never really been reported. And I think it's largely because the actual rumin as well as their gastrointestinal tract is more developed. So we actually looked at the development of these uh polyps within the rin. These animals were only 3 to four weeks old when we were dissecting.
(33:12) So, we're actually counting the structure of these polip-like structures within the rin. This is what a polip looks like. We classified them and what we found is that these animals that were fed the C4C6 treatment had a lot more polip development within their rins. This is interesting because we're delivering something to the small intestine and it's actually affecting the development of the rin.
(33:36) Okay, so it's pretty cool that that can happen. So, this is kind of interesting. It kind of shows and it's a branch of research we've been working on is matching milk feeding and the composition, the amount we feed with the starter. Okay, I think it's time to change topics now. Okay, [laughter] getting a lot of uh intensity uh dwindling away.
(33:57) So, let's uh the the largest cheer of the day and I heard it from Ghee. Okay, it was dairy beef. So, let's deliver ghee what Ghee wants. Okay. Okay. Same with you, Robert. Okay. This is for you. I'm going to dedicate that this uh section to you. So, let's do a little bit. I got you got me for at least another 15 minutes.
(34:16) So, let's spend about 10 15 minutes on this topic. It's something that I'm really focused on with Dave Renault. We've just started uh we have a 5-year NSIRC grant with DFO, CX as well as TR BFO, VFO as well um other organizations, NSIRC, OMAFA. So, it's really great. BCRC as well, BFO, uh, are also contributing to these projects.
(34:40) But it's really fascinating and it's exactly what I wanted. It came at the perfect time because I still want to study early life programming and how that affects the animal later on in life. But I don't have enough guts to do these studies that last 10 years. So in the dairy beef world, we are slaughtering them right after one year.
(34:56) So we can actually study how early life interventions can impact uh their phenotype at maturity of harvest. but it's uh really emerging too as we all know. So here's some recent numbers from Canada. This is a review that's in the journal of dairy science that's still in the review process. But just showing you the different percentages and how things have been changing.
(35:17) So this is uh from market calves crossbreads are now at 60% of the total calves at market. And not that long ago, 10 years ago it was around 5 7%. So this is changing really quickly. What else is changing really quickly and much to the chagrin of doing research sometimes is the price of these animals um is dramatically increasing.
(35:39) So there's also rumors that calves are receiving 25 20 2500 for newborn calves right now. Uh there's some weaned animals being sold for over 3,000. So these are massive numbers that are unprecedented and they're historic. Okay, I think we need to acknowledge that they're historic. But also what is historic is the price of beef right now because our cow calf operations our cow numbers are dwindling.
(36:05) So our uh production is very different with respect to conventional beef production and dairy beef production. I would say these dairy beef calves and I say dairy beef in the sense that that also includes call cows that's under the definition of dairy beef. crossbreads or beef on dairy are a part of the dairy beef as well as uh holings as well that are purebred.
(36:28) But basically the entire industry as well as the ve industry sometimes can be very segmented where you have a nursery, a grower, possibly a backgrounder but most likely it's going to a feed lot and then an abattoire. So their life is very different. They're weaned and fed completely different. Here's just a contrast of a dairy beef animal versus a conventional.
(36:48) So they're ad libit to milk in dairy in a actual conventional beef operation. They have transition milk. They have whole milk. They're weaned at 6 to 8 months. This is a big difference from a dairy beef animal or a beef on dairy animal where they're not fed that much colostrum. They're fed a little bit of milk replacer.
(37:07) They immediately go on to solid feed around 2 months of age. Okay? So there's a big difference. We're replacing the lactose from milk with starch from our feed sources. So this is a big difference. This is why people think liver abscesses are higher is because we're feeding so much starch to these animals. Uh but on top of this and something that we never discussed and there's just an experiment wrapping up at our research unit at Ponab about this is the massive amount of transportation in the dairy beef uh sector.
(37:35) The most noteworthy would be in the first week. That's a gamecher for a calf. We only transport an hour and a half from our uh purchaser and that's still extremely stressful. So some of these animals in particular in the US and some parts of Europe are on transports for over 24 hours easily.
(37:54) Some of them even up to 48 in certain countries. Thankfully we're reducing that in Canada. We have uh tighter regulations but even a short transport is really stressful and we have to manage them differently. So a lot going on here. So that's why you have to have keen grad students. Here's uh we started our dairy beef research program when I was in the Netherlands on sbatical.
(38:17) So these uh students are really tough. Uh Hannah McCarthy who's also a manager at OC as well. Uh Tuan who uh Shaplan who's been uh one of the first PhD students in this and Melinda who thankfully converted from a master degree just graduated and is starting her PhD uh and is focused on dairy beefing crossbed work too. So I'm very lucky and they're really tough because they started these experiments which are very challenging to do when I was on sbatical in Europe.
(38:45) So I really am very thankful for their hard work. But there's lots of data that we're generating right now. I'm just going to focus on some of the uh key takeaways. Uh Melinda, this is a paper in review that she's just submitted looking at the differences of holing and crossbread. This was done in collaboration with Maple View in their data sets.
(39:03) And basically they grow more okay they grow more throughout the entire rearing period but this pre-weening period it you can differentiate their growth already and also their average daily gain is uh higher during this pre-weening period. So this is looking at records from hundreds of animals as well.
(39:21) So crossfire calves have higher body weight and average daily gain. What I think is most important, especially with the amount of antibiotics that are being used in every single calf industry, the replacement, but especially the dairy beef or the male calves or even anything destined for the beef industry, we are overusing antibiotics and it's one of the major sources of antibiotics in livestock production.
(39:43) So what's really intriguing and this is again research from Melinda showing that the days of diarrhea when they go through this diarrhea about which they will after transport and change in their environment it's almost guaranteed is a lot shorter that's duration as well as the days to first fecal score they're a little bit older when they get that first uh insult of diarrhea respiratory not a big difference here in the overall incidence but what was also interesting in Melinda's thesis is to look at the treatments. Okay, so Holings had a
(40:17) higher hazard of receiving a single antibiotic treatment for diarrhea and the second and third treatment for BRD. So we're not having differences in the overall amounts of BRD, but the treatments of BRD, especially that second and third treatment were significantly lower in the crossbread calves.
(40:38) So that's a good story to promote. But that's great. we're still caught in the same pattern where we're only looking at pre-w weeding and we should really uh eventually increase this. So, we started some studies. This is the first part of the study where we looked at colostrum feeding and then I had the wild idea, hey, why don't we follow these animals for their entire life? Much to I'm sure the sugarrren of my students, but we did it.
(41:00) And this is just the results from the first uh days of life, the first 14 looking at feeding high levels of colostrum and low levels of colostrum with different breeds as well. So there wasn't a big difference except this lower group. These holines didn't absorb when we're feeding lower levels as much IGG.
(41:20) So just a moderate difference, but higher levels no difference. Lower levels there was a difference. and the apparent efficiency of absorption was just a little bit better in these crossbreads when you're feeding a lower amount. So that was uh quite interesting that result. Uh we also uh follow these animals for a lot longer.
(41:40) Here's some of the average daily gains. So we're getting like really high levels of average daily gains. This is in pounds, but in this particular study we were averaging over 2 kg of growth uh in the post-weening period. Yes, they were receiving uh implants uh traditional implants that definitely helps uh 100%. But we were actually re uh getting to maturity in these animals.
(42:02) We're reaching uh levels of intramuscular fat that are ideal for harvest uh really early in life. So 12 13 months. They were already uh over approaching 700 kg. We actually had some of them over 700 kg at 12 months of life. on average it was around 600 650 so reaching that maturity very early in life we didn't find uh a lot of uh liver abscesses actually you can count them all on one hand so I'm not really sure probably it's the age that we're slaughtering is quite early but they are reaching maturity and their
(42:38) intramuscular fat is also at a good level so we're getting good grades out of these animals even in early life but I still think we need to do some more uh data mining and some more experimentation on the proper slaughter date because this is uh dramatically younger compared to what you would report in a conventional beef system.
(42:57) So I think breed and early like nutrition can impact growth in marbling. I won't get into actual marbling data but we're lucky to have an abattoire at the University of G where we can take a little bit deeper look at the actual meat science aspect of this and we can also calculate feed conversion for their entire life.
(43:16) Okay, so this is really powerful what we have at the University of G where we can actually measure feed intake every single day of this animal's life. That's really incredible. It really differentiates our our actual research. So, we're about to uh submit a lot of these first rounds of papers. Some of them have already been submitted from this study, about two of them, but we're still continually developing them and we're diving deeper into the meat science aspect of this research.
(43:42) Now I must admit uh there's a huge advantages to studying meat science. I didn't know why all these uh beef scientists were so happy all the time until I started to do meat science work. Then you can have barbecues all the time and then a lot of pe your students from countries like Argentina and Brazil can teach you how to properly prepare meat.
(44:03) So it's been a very positive experience not only doing research in dairy beef because it's really fun but also this aspect is quite good and I must uh give kudos to some of the people even in this room. Lucille where are you? You he is one of the best people at barbecuing in this room hands down I think that you are also very good Lucia.
(44:25) Uh so if you're if your name sounds like that Lucia Lucio like you're pretty much set. you know, how to barbecue like a champion and they're at different levels than Canadians and that's what I've learned from them and I'm very thankful and it's it's amazing uh what we have. Sorry, I just wanted a closeup there. >> I I got it.
(44:44) I invited you but you didn't respond G. Sorry. So, I didn't take it personally but now I will. Anyways, uh we're interested in this idea of how we can change meat from early life. And this really comes um Marcio Dwarte was a professor in our department. He did a lot of prenatal work showing that you can affect meat quality later on in life.
(45:05) But we're really interested in how we can make animals marble more. Okay? And this marbling window is happening in early life. So, we think the amount that we feed them and the composition of the feed can actually have a long-term uh um response in these animals. So, here's the main marbling window. So, we can actually get the animal at the rearing, the pre-w weeding period, and actually possibly make an impact on their carcass quality based on how we're feeding.
(45:32) And it's actually perfect because we can manipulate them more during this pre-weening and also post-weening period all the way up to about 8 months based on dietary interventions. And then the conventional beef sector does not have that opportunity because the calf is with the cow. So I think there's more opportunities for interventions to affect some of these phenotypes.
(45:53) So we did a an experiment that just wrapped up. Uh Melinda was also involved uh also my PhD student Tutoan where they looked at composition. And so they looked at high lactose versus highfat milk replacers. And then these animals were also uh fed either a control starter which was pretty much a normal high starch uh starter and grower and then a fat supplemented one. So 7% crude fat.
(46:18) So we're feeding quite a bit of fat in that particular treatment pre-w weeding as well as post-weeding. And they were on these diets until 8 months of life. And then the fat milk replacer, same thing, a control starter as well as a fat supplemented starter. So what we found is that this uh pre-weeding period uh yes we did have some slight differences in intake but where uh and also some of the the actual growth was a little bit different but really where it was really differentiating was that dry feed diet they were actually growing a lot more on
(46:53) the one that was higher in starch and lower in fat. Okay. I thought their actual intake would be the same with respect to energy. I think it is, but their overall just dry matter intake was a lot larger on the ones that was higher starch. So, kind of an interesting find. We're still going through this data.
(47:11) Now, we're looking at the composition of the meats uh with respect to this. And just some preliminary data here. So, this is a big difference actually. So, solid feed intake actually had a pretty big difference in overall growth in body weight here in this particular study. But when you look at the physiology of the animal, we can look at ribeye area.
(47:32) Not a lot of differences here. It looks like basically this high lactose even the control. So higher carbohydrates looks like it could potentially be increasing ribeye area. So some of the recommendations that we potentially have for replacement replacement animals might not be the case for actual dairy beef animals. Subcutaneous fat.
(47:53) It looks like maybe there's something going on with this high lactose as well as high starch diet. And then intramuscular fat. It looks like yeah, something's going on with these uh group with respect to the high lactose in the control diet having more intramuscular fat compared to the calves that had the high lactose as well as the fat uh for the post-weening diet or for the solid feed diet.
(48:17) So, lots that we need to dive deeper into, but I just wanted to give everyone a taste of kind of the direction we're moving with this particular research. We see a huge advantage uh because of the support from Canada but also our research units are filling in a big void with respect to all the research because everyone's just looking at calves for the first 60 days or the finishing ration and we don't even know how old these animals are how they were raised before.
(48:44) So with our research units we can follow them from start to finish which is really powerful. So we have a early life uh you know data analysis that we're diving deep into looking at health. We also have this colostrum and breed experiment that you'll uh read more about in the coming year. We also have this nutrient source study.
(49:03) We're just about on the finishing uh side of things with this high versus low milk study that we just did. These animals are around 8 months old right now. So we're slaughtering them early 2026. And we're also starting another study looking at post-weening diets that will be starting in spring of 2026. And they just keep on coming.
(49:22) There appears to be a lot of demand for this type of research. And we're really fortunate. Here's some uh pictures of the new calf facility at Ponab. Here's a little video of it. So, it was amazing that we have these types of facilities. This is kind of like the Taj Mahal for uh dairy beef calves here, though. uh you don't really see a lot of commercial environments but like this but it's pretty amazing uh what we have available all automated feeders as you can see from inside this calf kitchen.
(49:53) So with the amount of work that we're doing it's really nice to have these kind of facilities where we can actually do this work and look at even behavioral components to it as well. So we can know how fast they're drinking, their suckling activity, things of this. And this pen that we're going to scan to pretty soon was actually uh yeah, here's our this video is a little long here, but uh these calves were delivered that day.
(50:21) So that was just a couple hours after getting off uh the transport. So really great environment. We're also uh attempting to look at green feed measurements of methane in this work. And it's really nice what we have where we can actually take 3-month old calves and put it into our feed lot and they actually stay there for their entire time until maturity. So very lucky.
(50:39) Okay. So I'm I'm glad that we had this time. I'm wrapping up right now and uh looking forward to your questions talking about colostrum. I think there's a lot going on there with respect to claustrogenesis as well as how to feed that animal colostrum properly and other applications of it. Milk feeding. I think we need to start thinking about how milk feeding and starter are combined and they interact and also the total amounts.
(51:04) Uh we still need to revisit and dairy beef is really exploding right now. It's a very exciting uh topic. I'm sorry I know that uh people really wanted to hear about my collaborations with Dave Renault. uh but it looks like we should spend uh the time on questions and I will revisit this topic based on the enthusiasm I received at the beginning in my next presentation for Daria G plus he's not here because apparently he's teaching is that true can you validate that Stephen what he said >> okay we'll take his word you can challenge him this afternoon but anyways
(51:36) I'd like to thank our sponsors for this research as well we do have a colostrum conference that I'm hosting at the University of G It's going to be May 20th to 22nd. We also have a producer day May 23rd. So if you'd like to participate, I'm organizing that with Dr. Amanda Fischer Tus. And also we have an animal bioscience grad symposium December 9th. Okay.
(52:01) So if anyone's in G, Dan Ganesha is helping us. Katie Wood is a big part of the committee. But basically this allows our graduate students to present uh posters as well as orals. It starts at 9:00 goes to 4. So, it's a big day, but to celebrate, we also have a graduate student career mixer, okay? And that's happening at the bull ring.
(52:22) And this allows the private industry to interact with our graduate students, which I think is really, really missing. We need to tie this a lot more. And this is our attempt to do so. So, please register for this event. It's all free. I've been uh overwhelmed by the industry support that we received. I sent out 50 emails and within a week uh we have enough to run this and it's really amazing and I really shows that this uh connection really needs to take place and there's a thirst for it.
(52:52) So I very happy to support these kind of initiatives. So with that thank you for your attention. 50 minutes was pretty intense uh to start out. We got through it but I'm looking forward to your questions. [applause]