2025 Showcase Health Risk Assessment and Monitoring in the Transition Period - Eduardo Ribeiro - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lIMki5Vh2PM

Transcript:
(00:04) Okay, next up on our program, um, we'll switch back to, uh, animal health and in particular through the transition period and how that, uh, connects from from health and animal health, cow health and the transition period, modulation of inflammation, um, and and linking that out eventually to reproduction, um, is my colleague Eduardo Ribeiro, um, animal biosciences, uh, to take us up to the lunchtime break.
(00:30) Eduardo, the floor is yours. Thank you, Stephen. Um, I really appreciate the invitation to be part of the program this year, Stephen, and, uh, it's, uh, great opportunity, so thank you. I also want to thank you for your work as a director because I don't think we thank you enough for that. And I know there's a lot of work, uh, that goes behind the scenes, not only for this event, but for everything that Dairy at Guelph, uh, does and represents, so I really appreciate that. Thank you.
(01:06) Uh, so, So, we're going to be discussing, uh, a little bit about our research in transition management, some of the recent publications that we have, but also some ideas that we are pursuing that the students are currently working on. And I hope they'll will generate some thoughts and discussion later. So, So, is transition health is still a concern? Why the the reason I pose this question is because, of course, the industry has made a lot of progress in terms of their facilities, uh, how they feed cows during transition,
(01:55) uh, Uh, even the genetics, we're we're making more progress in terms of how to have healthier cows, um, more longevity, but, uh, when we look at larger studies, um, that have been done recently after 2017, we did this compilation that we have researchers doing assessment of more than 28,000 cows in 40 hertz, both US and Canada, and there is still a good, uh, a very significant proportion for herd that have incidence of clinical problems that are at least on the top of the the table. So, to me it's still a very
(02:34) important problem that the industry faces. Those clinical diseases, they are linked to transition, right? So, the incidence is higher on the first two, three weeks after calving, and then after that is more a basal incidence of mastitis, some lameness cases, but most of the problems are in the postpartum period.
(02:57) And they have consequences. The short-term consequences are easy to see. The animal is not doing well, so there are concerns with the the animal, the animal welfare. There are treatment expenses involved. There's also some concern with the farmer well-being in some cases because it is a tool, uh, on their well-being because they care for their cows, of course.
(03:21) But more important for our discussion here, the long-term effects that, uh, observed even after clinical resolution of that problem. So, lactation performance will be affected, reproduction performance as well, and uh, the stability or the the longevity of the herd is also affected by what happens early uh, postpartum.
(03:43) And here is an example of a study that we put it together more than five information of 5,000 cows. This was done by Murilo Carvalho here at the publication a few years back where he simply classified cows according to number of clinical disease in the first 21 days postpartum. And he demonstrate the impact that a single or multiple disease have on milk production is very substantial.
(04:12) But also reproductive performance even though reproductive management is starting a few months after clinical resolution of those cases, there's still a large impact. A large impact on cooling rate and then more importantly this affects the profitability of the dairy farmers. So we estimate that the profit the cash flow total cash flow for cows that had a single case in the first 21 days is reduced by 14% and by multiple case reduced by 28%.
(04:49) So it is important and that's why we are studying about this. So I've been the animal sciences for almost 10 years now and working with Flavio and Christine I I've grew to realize the importance of genetics and And of course we're lucky to work with some farmers that do genotyping and and we are considering that in our models and those effects doesn't seem to be affected by their merit on milk production or their merit in reproduction and longevity.
(05:20) We still see affected there despite their genetic merit. So those are the things that we are interested that we can summarize kind of the ideas that we are pursuing. So the importance here of monitoring doesn't need to explain much, right? Given the importance of health is important for every farmer to understand if they are doing a good job or not, if things are progressing, are getting better or if there are any problems that need to be addressed? And there's a lot of consultants here in the room, and you probably have come across
(05:54) this challenge of arriving on a farm that you basically don't have a way to assess if the transition management is good or not. So, we are working on that area. So, the challenges are the inconsistencies on definitions of what is good, what is bad, on the practices on the farm, and on the recording as well. Which is also a problem for our geneticists that is one of the the problems of making faster progress in in selection for health.
(06:25) I think it's just lack of good recording. So, the opportunities that we see here is the development of new methods of streamline methods, this is what we're calling. So, it's an indirect assessment of transition health, but that we believe might be able to make some progress on how we assess transition management, make some progress over the years.
(06:49) And I'll give examples of that. The other area is prevention. Of course, if you prevent that problem, you stop the problem in the first place. So, this is of course important, but most of the prevention that we normally do to this day is at the herd level, and there is still individual cow needs that are not always met.
(07:11) So, we are interested on identify cows that even though you did your best to provide the best manage for them, they might be a higher risk, and potentially develop solutions for that animal in that condition to have reduced risk of problems there. And then the other thing that we do a little bit of work as well is on treatment protocols and post treatment management.
(07:40) The challenges here is that as I showed to you, even when you treat cows for clinical disease, there is still a large consequence of those problems. So, our ideas is basically can we do a better job treating this those cows? Can we improve treatment protocols? And the other question is can should we be management managing those cows differently after when they have those problems, right? We're not We're going to try to prevent as much as we can, but there will always be a a case here and there that will be happening. So, when
(08:16) that happens, should we do anything differently? So, that's another question that we are addressing. So, I'll try to give an example of each aspect here starting with monitoring. This is our current recommendations on things that we can measure on farm and what are the targets that we should achieve. And this every item here has research to back up on those recommendations.
(08:44) And they're related with the body condition score that we should aim at during transition, the length of dry period, or close up. Of course, calving, we should avoid dystocia, twinning, and and stillbirth. Uh avoiding losses of body condition score after calving. And then the most important things in my opinion, which are clinical health, to know if the cow has clinical diseases or not.
(09:09) Subclinical is also relevant, and then cooling. So, some farmers already do a good job of maintaining records, maybe not of all of them, but some of them, which are very helpful for consultants to work with them and try to make a progress. But in general, this is not the case for most farms. Uh there is a challenge again with the consistency of those records, and that becomes a challenge.
(09:41) So, then comes the idea of using the streamline assessment of standardized data. So, there are data in the farm that is more standardized, and this is milk production. So, it's an example of that. And here's the difference on lactation curve according to the number of clinical disease in the first 21 days. So, it's you can clearly see that they are performing differently.
(10:07) So, historically, consultants have used, for instance, milk production at week four as a indirect way of looking how things are going. You can compare with industry uh standards, basically, or milk at peak, or days uh until peak, right? because cows with disease, they will peak lower and later in time. So, those are indirect ways that you can look at uh based on the expectations and compare with what the industry is reporting, with the benchmarks of our industry.
(10:42) But there are other ideas that can be explored. So, one is the idea that perhaps we can estimate what will be the milk production of an individual cow. So, that would be the blue line here. But then, uh let's say that for this cow specifically, she had a clinical disease early in production.
(11:03) So, what we expect the initial drop in milk production, cuz she is feeling sick, not eating much. But then, she finally resolved the problem, and then milk starts to go back up, which is great. But that red line, that represents a scenario with the clinical disease, on average, will never touch that blue line again, even after months of clinical resolution of that problem.
(11:27) So, if we have ways to predict what would happen with this cow and measure what is actually happening. This difference can be used as an interactive way to assess transition quality, especially at the herd level. So, this more or less is the idea that the transition management index that Lactanet has recently launched nationwide is using.
(11:52) So, they use a lot of the variables that they have in their database to estimate the predicted milk production for each individual cow. Um milk production 305 days. And then when that cow has finally uh received the first milk test, now with the information milk volume, somatic cell count, BHB milk, and days in milk at first test, they update that prediction and it's now called a projection projected milk production.
(12:25) And the difference between the two is the transition management index. So, a producers can have can log into their um Lactanet account and look at the the transition page that they have on that account and can find information of the transition management index. So, every cow represents a square here and then this line represents the average of the herd.
(12:55) So, in this case you can see that it's keeping consistent and it's a positive number. So, that means that the projected milk production is 500 kg more for that lactation than the predicted. So, if it is positive, more than what was actually predicted, it's very likely that things the transition is good on their herd for uh for the most part, right? So, you can also look at the percentage of animals that have a negative value.
(13:26) So, imagine if you're working with a cow that has minus 400, we expected 400 kg less in 305 days compared with what was predicted for that animal, and that is an indicative of a poor transition. So, there are some opportunities here. We're collaborating with Lactanet to to run a few studies to try provide some scientific validation for this and how that can be used to the farmers.
(13:57) But, we also see a lot of opportunities for improving uh that those models. So, we think that there's a bunch of variables that can be incorporated to improve the assessment of separating cows that had a good or bad transition. And one of the things that we're betting a lot of our money on is the incorporation of the sensor information.
(14:20) Uh because as you can see here, there are major differences, for instance, in rumination time between cows that are healthy and cows that have a clinical problem early in lactation. This is true also for physical activity. So, we believe that working uh with more uh fancy ways of uh doing data modeling like a machine learning, we can find ways to build tools that can incorporate those differences here with the differences that we see in milk production, perhaps improve that assessment, and we'll be working towards
(15:00) that. So, moving from management now, giving an example of prevention, uh we recently published a study uh that was done by Mateus Santos, which is also here. Uh there we work at the Elora Research Herd that allow us to uh measure individual feeding take of uh uh cows doing transition and we were exploring the importance of pre-partum feeding take for the subsequent performance of cows.
(15:32) So, we are able to separate groups of cows that have a high feeding take, moderate feeding take, and a low feeding take. And that had consequences for the next lactation performance. Cows that had a low feeding take, they produced less milk in the subsequent lactation. So, that reinforces the importance of promoting feeding take and during the pre-partum period to avoid problems in the subsequent post-partum and then optimizing milk production.
(16:02) But, of course, commercial farms, they don't Most of them, they don't have a way to measure individual feeding take. So, the good thing is that we had the sensors attached it in the collars of those cows and we were able to measure different things including rumination time. And in general, the correlation between rumination time and feeding take is not very good.
(16:26) It's existent, but it's not great. But, what we realized is that when the cows approach calving, when they are eating less and the rumen is not as as full, then the correlation improves. So, in the last week of gestation, the correlation is actually much better than before and we decided to test this idea. Maybe we can use rumination time as a risk factor for for cows in commercial herds.
(16:55) So, this is what we decided to test. We did some statistics to identify a cutoff point in rumination time in the last week of gestation. So, basically, the idea is a cow calved today, you look at back the last 7 days of rumination time. You to start that, you need to collect a few cows to have a standard deviation. We recommend at least 30 cows to have a good estimation of standard deviation and the average of the herd and you're going to subtract 0.
(17:31) 73 standard deviation from the average of the herd. So in the case of this herd that we work with, the average was 450 minutes. The standard deviation 72 * 0.7 that's 53 minutes. So when we take this out, if a cow had 397 minutes or less as average of rumination time, she's considered a high-risk cow. So for heifers that are going to calve for the first time, this model didn't work. It's there is no relationship.
(18:03) We couldn't make anything really useful of that. But for older cows, there were some interesting findings. For older cows, 25% were classified as high-risk compared with the 75% low-risk. And when we compare their health performance in the first 15 days there were 3.2 times greater odds of postpartum problems. Uh reproduction pregnancy rate was reduced 36%.
(18:38) There was there were two times more likely to leave the herd and there is a difference in milk production of 428 kg. So that was really interesting because only based on rumination time in the last week of gestation, we were able to separate those two groups with major differences in performance. But then the question is is this really just this herd or is you know, so we are expanding that research to other herds now.
(19:08) We're going to have five herds in total and we're also considering improving those prediction models. So, for that we're incorporating other variables in in addition to rumination time. We're also learning how to use machine learning models. And the preliminary results only with a small data set that we already have in place.
(19:33) And there was significant improvements in precision and in the area under the curve for predictions of health clinical disease yes or no after calving. So, we're making progress. We're also trying to develop something for heifers, which is more difficult to me is just because they are more homogeneous group of animals.
(19:55) And it's hard to predict who is going to have problems or not compared with older cows that had a history behind them already. But we're trying. And then of course it's important to identify those animals with the higher risk, but then what do you do with them, right? You can keep a closer look, but is there anything else that we can do to help those animals? And we're currently testing an intervention.
(20:23) We decided to go with anti-inflammatory drug and propylene glycol because on the first study that I just showed to you based on blood sampling, we realized that there was a deficiency in energy and higher inflammation for the cows that we classify as high risk. So, we're trying to approach the two problems. The anti-inflammatory for the inflammation and the propylene glycol to help with the energy deficiency.
(20:52) So, the goal is to enroll 560 cows in four dairies. We're working on that. We have already 350 enrolled. So, next year we'll be able to share the final results with you in this event in November next year. So, going back to that those predictions, one thing that was really interesting to me, and I'm still questioning that perhaps it's just because we have a small data set, but we are making a good predictions on the day of calving of what cows are more likely to have problems or not.
(21:29) But then we decided to test, can we do those predictions earlier? So, we look at two uh variables that up to close up movement minus 21 and even dry off. And there is some good results there for some of the machine learning models. And that really caught my attention, so maybe we can do some predictions earlier.
(21:53) For the dry off, again, this is not heifers, right? It's just older cows. So, if this model for dry off, some of the things that caught our attention is really the relevance of body condition score and milk production at dry off. So, here's the current data that our students are currently collecting. You can see there's huge variability on body condition score with less than half of the cows where we consider ideal body condition score.
(22:23) Huge variability on milk production on the week preceding dry off, which also seems to have consequences for their susceptibility to diseases after. And we don't really know what's the good combination there of milk production body condition score. They are negatively correlated, but the correlation is not very strong as we probably, at least me, that I thought it would be more strong, and it's not as the So, there are other factors playing a role.
(22:52) So, we are excited. Here we have data of 1,500 cows already. We're going to have more than 2,000 cows at the end of this study. So, we are excited to try to learn a bit more and make some good recommendations to farmers on how they should be aiming for milk production, body condition score, the combination, some other factors that we are considering.
(23:17) This uh data also reinforces the important of pre-partal management. And that the dry-off period is supposed to be the vacation for our cows, right? But uh you probably like me, you might have experiences in the past that you plan a vacation and things turn out not to be as excited as you thought it would be, right? So, the food is not great, the place perhaps is not great, the bed doesn't look very good, you're not sleeping well.
(23:50) All you want to do is go back home, start working again, right? Because your wife is mad at you. Even the dogs might be mad at you, so I think that some of our cows unfortunately are feeling the same on their vacation, right? So, so we're not perhaps providing the ideal vacation for our cows.
(24:13) So, we should think a bit more on how we're feeding, where the environment they are, if they are really enjoying their vacation or not. So, then moving to treatment protocols, just an example that we tried to improve the treatment protocol for metritis. Metritis is one of the worst uh diseases that happen early post-partal. The treatment protocol is mostly based on antimicrobials and we decided to test if we incorporate uh anti-inflammatory and try to limit the amount of inflammation that is happening on that animal, if that would lessen the problems, right? This would
(24:53) be the objective. We know that when a cow is sick, we already going to have consequences of that. But, can we reduce the amount of consequences that we have? So, we we did uh this study in Brazil because of logistics. We were able We have a road team to check a lot of cows postpartum. So, in this case, we checked uh 2,700 cows to find 500 cows with metritis, which was what what what we needed.
(25:21) 250 in each group, half received only antimicrobial, the other half the same antimicrobial plus injections of uh anti-inflammatory drugs. This case, meloxicam, injectable meloxicam. And uh it turns out that our hypothesis was correct. So, what you're seeing here is the survival curve for time to pregnancy.
(25:47) In green, you have cows that didn't have any metritis become pregnant faster compared with the other two groups that had metritis. But, you can see that the cows that received meloxicam in addition to the antimicrobial become pregnant faster than the cows that received ceftiofur only. And these statistics are presented here.
(26:08) So, using uh ceftiofur, the antimicrobial only as a reference group, we see an improvement in the pregnancy rate during this period of 29%. 64% for cows without metritis. So, yes, we didn't make the cow with metritis to perform the same as cows without metritis, but I think we wouldn't be able to do that anyways because it's a severe problem, and we're making progress in terms of uh lessening the consequence of that disease.
(26:37) Milk production, the same. You can see the milk here is not very high because of those uh crossbreed cows in Brazil, but we see also cows without metritis producing more milk compared with the other two groups uh that had metritis, but the one that we incorporate the anti-inflammatory being intermediate and also make some improvements in milk production there.
(27:03) So, the conclusions here is the incorporation of meloxicam into the treatment protocol of metritis lessened the consequence of disease on reproduction and milk production, which that was our goal. So, just to summarize the ideas that we're working on, we think that is fundamental to have ways to assess transition quality in every herd if possible, right? And to quantify the consequences to production efficiency, especially on economics, because then the farmers can plan their investments based on that as well. So,
(27:43) we're working towards that. We're working on preventive practices, which is very important at the herd level, but we also think that there are animals with different needs, and we're working on this process of health risk assessment and target preventive strategies at the cow level. I presented some ideas here at the uh calving, but we also think that this might be possible to do a dry-off that we can change the dry-off protocols and perhaps help some cows that need help in this transition to the dry period and help
(28:19) their vacation time. And then enhance treatment protocols and think about this idea of post-treatment management, where especially interesting culling decisions and reproductive management according to history of health disorders, and uh Steven is also working those areas, so hopefully we'll have some good recommendations uh soon for producers on how to work on that.
(28:47) So, we're very excited that we recently received approval for designing circle alliance. I want to take the time to thank all the collaborators, the industry collaborators with this. Uh this is crucial for us to continue to make progress in this area. So, I'm very, very thankful. Some of you are here in the room, so I really appreciate your support.
(29:14) And we're going to be doing more and more work. Uh so, we already start uh I study one, which is cow level of studies. We're going to enroll more than 3,000 cows. The students are going from Monday to Saturday are in multiple farms. They are working really hard. And we are about 60% done with the field studies.
(29:37) Lot to do after in the lab and with data management, but things are progressing really well. We also start a second study where the focus is the herd level. So, we want to visit 60 herds three times in a year. And we start this 1 month ago with enroll already 18 farms. But anyone that is passionate about this and wants to help us to recruit some farms, uh I really appreciate.
(30:07) Please don't hesitate to reach out if you can contribute with us reaching out to more farmers to get those at least 60 herds that we need. Um and then study three will be in the future 27, 28, but the goal is everything that we learn from those ideas, we're going to try to implement doing studies of proof of concept that they are actually working.
(30:30) And uh so, hopefully we'll be successful with that as well. So, I also want to take the time to thank the farmers that already signed up for a study two, but especially for the farmers that we are working here for farmers on your study one. They are really appreciate and Dave and Laura were here from Summerhill, so I really appreciate you open the door for us.
(30:55) It means the world for these students to be able to do the research in in in real real farms, right? That So and learning from from you guys as well. It's I can't explain how much important that is for the grad students. So so thank you very much. And I want to thank these students. So some of the old folks that and are not in the lab anymore, but some of the data present from them they're already published.
(31:28) And I special thanks to the guys that are now currently working. I'm very grateful for those guys because they are doing very a lot of work. So from as I mentioned Monday to Saturday every day on farms. It's sometimes I know it's a bit too much for them. But then they pray on on Sunday and they go back on Monday again and and things are progressing great.
(31:56) So I'm very thankful for this group of students. They are really hard working. A lot of them are in the room. Some are in the farmer in the farms because today is Thursday, but I I just want to give a a a you know, the credit for for those guys they are doing the work. So so thank you very much for your attention.
(32:18) I'll be happy to answer any questions if I have some time.