Practical Steps to Improve Diet Digestibility: Firkins, OSU; Weiss, OSU; Krogstad, OSU - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lT-qd9TJVJM

Transcript:
(00:00) [Music] Good evening everyone and welcome to the Real Science Exchange, the podcast where leading scientists and industry professionals meet over a few drinks to discuss the latest ideas and trends in animal nutrition. We're here at the uh Tri-State Nutrition Conference 2025 uh in Fort Wayne, Indiana, and we're reviewing some presentations that's taking place this week.
(00:29) The one we're going to review now is called practical steps to improve diet digestibility and that's done by Dr. Jeff Ferkins from the Ohio State University. Jeff, welcome. That put enough emphasis on that. >> Yeah, I think you did put enough >> uh Jeff before we get started, what I'd like you to do is just for the folks out there that may not know who you are, just kind of give us some background about who Jeff Perkins is.
(00:53) >> Okay. Uh well, I'm originally from Illinois, so I've met some people who are nearby where I'm from. Uh I went to the University of Illinois and did several degrees there. And then I've been at Ohio State since uh 1987, one month actually before Bill started there. >> Wow. Yeah. Excellent. >> But he's older than me.
(01:13) >> Yeah. >> Well, my favorite game to play, and I'm just going to do this now, is uh Jeff, what year did you start at Ohio State? 1987. >> And what year did you start? >> 88. January of 88. >> One month before. >> I I just like to point out that I wasn't born until 1996. And you I I just want to drop it in because when when would you have been born? Laura? >> 1993.
(01:35) >> There we go. Yeah. >> Oh, wow. >> Just remember Dr. Fkins votes on tenure. So just remember that. So >> So Kirby, while you've got the floor, why don't you tell the folks who you are? >> Yeah, my name is Kirby Crogstead and I've been on faculty at Ohio State now for uh just over a year. Um before that I did research at Michigan State with Dr.
(01:55) Bradford and investigating um inflammation, animal health and nutrition. Um then I spent time at Nebraska before that with Dr. Kongh and I'm a native South Dakota, so I'm a jack rabbit. >> Yep. Yep. Good. Well, thanks for joining us once again. >> Laura's going to be my co-host today. Laura Nihus is uh a newly minted Balkim employee for from about six months ago, right? Yep.
(02:16) >> Laura, introduce yourself to the audience. >> Yeah. Uh my name is Laura Nihus and like Scott said, I started with Balcom uh in December, so not too long ago. I've been getting caught up to speed and doing lots of podcasts. I've been in industry a few years, but prior to that, I did my PhD at University of Illinois and looking at rin protected amino acids during transition period.
(02:38) And prior to that, I actually was ecoin nutrition for my masters at Kansas State University and resident of Florida. So always coming to the cold weather. >> Yep. And so what do you do for Balkam? >> I am technical services specialist at >> Balkam. Covering what territory? >> Covering the east coast. So covering the whole east.
(02:56) >> All right. Good. And then Dr. Bill Weiss. Bill, thank you for joining us once again real quick. Uh >> you already know. >> We know how old you are. >> And I worked there for about 35 years. Retired a few years ago and getting better at golf and worse on cow. So >> very well Jeff. um why don't you just kind of give us an overview of the presentation that you're going to give tomorrow.
(03:22) [Music] New research is changing everything we thought we knew about choline's impact on the cow and her calf. And top scientists have a lot to say about it. They are presenting new research that supports choline as a required nutrient to optimize milk production. Choline as a required nutrient to support a healthy transition, choline as a required nutrient to improve calf health and growth, and choline as a required nutrient to increase colostrum quantity.
(04:00) This new research is solidifying choline's role as a required nutrient for essentially every cow, regardless of health status, milk production level, or body condition score. Learn more about the science that is changing the game and the choline source that is making it happen. Reassure precision release choline from Balm. Visit balchm.
(04:22) com/scientists sayay to learn more. [Music] Okay. Uh so I'm I was asked to talk about diet digestibility. So I'm going to go through some key aspects of what is in the diet and how to try to improve them. Uh so how how we can improve starch digestibility a little bit. On the other hand, starch decreases fiber digestibility.
(04:53) Some tips on trying to reduce that depression. I'm probably going to step out on a limb and talk a little bit about fat digestibility, which maybe I'll have Adam Lock correct me on. >> Yeah. uh and and then kind of finish off with a few things related uh to the total diet especially with fiber digestibility. >> Now the one thing I liked about the the title was is practical steps.
(05:20) So kind of give us an idea there. You're you're going to just kind of talk about um some things that nutritionists can do practically on the day. >> I'm going to try to but my handicap is really high on that. >> Okay. >> Worse than bills on golf. >> Is that right? Okay. So uh I I'll try to do that and give give some examples the best I can and uh you know when I talk at these I always try to provide the the mechanism or something so that people can help to troubleshoot not try to tell other people how to do their job better
(05:53) when you know they're doing that every day. So I'm going to try to help them to think a little bit about what you know what kind of scenarios they might want to try. >> Yeah. Good. All right, >> I I'll start off. You know, we've known this negative relationship between starch and fiber digestion forever 50 years or more.
(06:12) >> And if you look at that meta analysis a few years ago, the depression starts at very very low starch concentrations. What why why do you think this is? It's can't be a pH thing at that. >> Yeah, I I think you know the the depression is probably only about half of it is pH. The other half is other factors that we call the carbohydrate effect.
(06:38) So it could be I I never really looked up where those you know what kind of diets those were. They could have been lower in protein or you know a lot of times especially historically people did did things or trying to set up I'm comparing this to this and they don't really think about the rest of the diet so much.
(06:55) So it could be something like that. But but I feel like if we're if we're going to help to make sure we maximize fiber digestibility, we have to have enough ammonia and um amino acids. I'm going to talk a little bit tomorrow that there's sort of a dogma that the cyolytic bacteria don't need amino acids, but there shouldn't be.
(07:13) It's they they do. And so we need to make sure we provide enough room in degraded protein RDP. So um I think that's some of it. And some of it is they just displace the bacteria. They're just more the more starch you give, the more our other bacteria, you know, all swimming in the same swimming pool trying to find a place to, you know, to land.
(07:39) And so some of it's kind of that. So >> competitive exclusion just push >> exclusion. Yeah. Right. >> Fibbrolytic bacteria. Or is highly digestible fiber more susceptible to starch depression than bas soy holes versus corn stone? >> Actually, that's a point I'm going to make tomorrow that probably the the source that is the most susceptible is soybean holes or I didn't bring it up in there, but maybe something like corn gluten feed, something that has a a really high extent of fiber digestibility. And we don't even think
(08:11) about it. We, you know, when we designed these diets, we would try to lower starch, we add more soybean holes, and we improve fiber digestibility. Yes, we did, but we we lost some fiber digestibility because we we didn't get all that we could have out of those highly degradable soil holes. So, it doesn't mean you still don't have a negative effect.
(08:35) So, yeah, I think they're even more prone. Exactly. I want to dovetail on the interaction of the starch and fiber a little bit because it's it if I remember right from a paper I think it was a Hoover paper in the 80s looked at hind gut NDF digestion versus ruminal digestion and so like the depression effect of additional starch is that just rumininal and if it is just ruminal then you would expect a ruminally degradable starch to depress that more so and is that data out there or does that has that relationship borne out? Uh, wow. That's I I think you're
(09:06) probably right that if we if we have really high starch and we depress fiber digestibility in the rin, we probably are also are in the large intestine. >> But boy, that's hardly ever been looked at, especially for dairy cattle. >> Uh, placing an ilio canula in dairy cattle is really hard. I I did that for a few studies and I got tired of being called out in three in the morning.
(09:30) So, uh, so it's really hard to to know, but I I think there probably is some of that. You know, the the more a cow eats, the faster the passage rate that affects the ruin, but it also affects the hind gut, too. So, there's only so much time that that that's there. And the more you prolong the the negative effects downstream, the less time you have to get proper fiber digestibility.
(09:55) And and in sheep, for example, it's probably the opposite. they have a longer large intestine there probably is more opportunity for compensatory fiber digestibility but that's just a guess but >> yeah it hasn't really been done >> do you think you know there's old data again showing high protein diets well in excess of requirement improves dry matter digestibility significantly is do you think you'd see the same thing with ura I get that question a lot is can can I feed ura meet the RDP requirement and still get all the
(10:31) benefits of say so RDP or some other RDP source. I really don't think you can uh you could if if you really are suffering from a rumin ammonia deficiency and then yeah then ura is a good way to go but the like I was just saying at the beginning you know the cellytics they don't just need ammonia I know there's sort of the dogma that they do but they need actually amino nitrogen probably not just the branch chain ones but also probably phenol alanine and U weirdly maybe even proline it's kind of uh potentially limiting one. So I I think
(11:11) they need to have natural RDP not just that not just ura. What is our knowledge on what those requirements would be then? If we're looking at say just looking at branch chain amino acids and if you mentioned phenyl alamine, how how comfortable are we with saying, okay, we probably need this much for the rin in addition to what we're thinking about for what we want the cow to receive.
(11:36) >> It's a little bit of the wild west that we we kind of don't know. So you know we draw from in vitro kind of studies that to try to extend it to what is needed in the cow. But uh you know to a certain extent it's really hard to do because they mix up the amino acids they break down and provide mixed carbon skeletons and then they make what they want out of it.
(12:04) So you can't just feed uh let's say lysine and see does that improve digestibility or does it improve microbial protein. So you kind of have to look at them in a combination and that work really hasn't been done but I I think it should be I think there really is a need for at least some of them could be that methinine could be limiting in some cases believe it or not um >> in the rin >> in the rin and uh so and and it probably depends on the microbes that are there and so on like methinine is something that when people study fiber degradation you and
(12:40) use pure cultures of celltics, they always put a little bit of methane in because they know that it helps them to do their job better, phenol alanine. So yeah, they're they're but to you know to your question, Bill, we we need ammonia and it's more important than the other amino acids, especially for the celltics, but that doesn't mean they don't need the amino acids.
(13:05) If we're trying to get the most we can out of them fast passage rate, they have to be able to, you know, stay with that, keep breaking down fiber and especially the better quality fiber that we feed. We want that broken down. We want the energy from it. We need to, you know, sort of beef up how we feed the the fibrolytic microbes in the rin.
(13:27) What about sugar? You've done you've worked on sugar almost your whole career at OSU over time. So, is it better than starch with respect to digestib total diet digestibility? >> So, I'm I'm actually talking about that a little bit tomorrow. Um, you know, there are some studies that show that sugar improves fiber digestibility, and you have to ask why.
(13:50) And I I actually went back to some of the sources on that. And uh I think some of it is that probably sucrose, believe it or not, can be used and possibly could help some of the cells. So it could be that it really does work in a way like that. But part of the aspect that I'm going to talk about tomorrow when we say sugar, a lot of times we're adding like molasses.
(14:15) Molasses had has a lot of stuff in it besides sugar. And it could be that those components are are really, you know, helpful as well. >> Does it matter what kind of sugar? Glucose, sucrose, fructose. >> So, people have actually done some of that. There's a few studies with sucrose where they've added and improves fiber digestibility.
(14:37) Uh, it could be that it's the fructose part of it. >> So, I wouldn't be surprised about that. I think it's probably not just glucose or moltos. They those seem to stimulate the the amolit the ones that break down uh starch the amalolytics. So I think uh probably the sucrose one um could be lactose. I get asked about lactose a lot.
(15:01) It it could be that that helps them out too. There just hasn't been very much as much done with lactose as as with sucrose. Before we get away from the carbohydrate discussion, I had a question about at least one of the most practical things I can think of when I talk to farmers and nutritionists is is corn particle size, grain particle size.
(15:20) What um you know, what do you think that particle size needs to be in a diet? And because I think we're in a trend of smaller is better, smaller is better. Um and is that the case or is there a floor to that number we should be shooting for or you know what what do you think? So I I've always I won't say always, but for a long time I've been thinking, well, we might as well get the most we can out of it.
(15:40) It takes some of the guesswork out. If if you have a coarser article size, then you're sort of wondering, is it vitrius or not? Do how what will the digestibility be? Let's just let's just, you know, put it out there and then feed not quite so much starch. I know maybe that's not a good thing to say a whole bunch of people from a certain state that you know >> I think I know what you're hinting at.
(16:06) >> May maybe you need to cut that one. I don't know. But uh but you know I I think it's you know we can feed room integrated starch and that's what we should be balancing for and some of the models are trying to do and then we optimize the best we can without overdoing it in there. And then uh you know we can also improve digestibility or energy with with better quality forage, soy holes, stuff like that.
(16:33) And you know the proper amount of fat so and feed intake. Mhm. >> Kind of building on what Kirby was asking, is there any benefit to maybe having multiple uh sizes of of of you know, you got your finely ground corn, maybe some medium ground so that it kind of uh levels out the availability of the starts in the room. >> Uh yeah, you can't that would be a good thing to do if we could project what the the overall digestibility would be.
(17:03) But the more variation you have like that, I think it's harder to guess it. >> Like if you have the more vitrius kind, if you've, you know, grind it really finely, you can take away the vitriusness of it. And so if you had more moderate particle size of a flowery kind of hybrid, then probably would do pretty well. So, um, I I don't know.
(17:26) I I I sort of feel like we want to grind finer, but we don't want to have a bunch of dust either. I mean, we have particle sizes out there now and sub 450, sub400 micron in some cases. I mean, there's some some pretty dusty corn getting fed to dairy cows out there. >> Yeah, I don't think we want, you know, something like that that could be unpalatable, but um you know, like like I I always kind of thought like in you know, you think about we send all this corn to California and then they steamflake it all.
(17:56) >> And well, when you steamflake it, you know what you have. It's the same every time. You don't you take some of the guesswork out of formulating to provide the right amount of starch in the diet and then when we grind it there's a lot of variability. Well, if we can reduce the variability to me that seems like a good thing.
(18:16) >> I I think I would agree. I I know Naom has a discussion in there about grain particle size and grain source on the fiber digestibility depression and I think it's a question we have yet to address. So you I think everybody would agree we should formulate for room and fermentable starch. How do I get that number? >> Yeah, that's I actually did a study where I did formulate that and it seemed to kind of work along what I had projected.
(18:43) But where do you get the numbers for that? That's that's a tough one. Um it's as is as as you know I've kind of been talking about like doing dwadinal canulation versus like now everybody do measil sampling through the room canula you kind of get different numbers for starch and that's kind of making it really hard to come up with here's what this room integrated starch value is because it depends on which system you use and we don't know which one's right.
(19:12) So, uh, ideally we would do that. If if we could come up with cohesive values for that, um, then it would be ideal. I don't have a good way to do it. So many people feed corn and they don't measure the particle size like you're obviously doing now, Kirby. >> Uh, you know, and and they just say it's coarse.
(19:36) I wrote a, you know, and and then I've seen some papers where they they do report the particle size, but I can look at the distribution and say, well, they obviously did something wrong because you can you can just look and say that can't be right. >> So, we need to do a better job of educating our researchers. If you're going to do a study, how hard is it to do corn particle size? Takes 10 minutes.
(19:56) You know, your student learned in a half an hour, >> right? >> It's not hard. We should be doing it then. then the metaanalyses will come out good. Like in NASA, we had a really hard time trying to predict um room and starch digestibility because there was so many imbalanced studies uh you know like like I still remember this you know doing this work and it kept saying that barley starch digestibility was lower than corn.
(20:22) >> Yeah. >> And of course we all know that can't be >> right. And and I went and looked at and because the studies were barley was added like one of the stud studies was barley was added to a diet that had corn silage in it that was 49% dry matter. What do you think the starch digestibility of that corn silage was? So it brought everything down.
(20:42) Then it makes it when you're looking at barley versus corn it's like barley's low. I mean it's like it's just really hard to do that stuff. So uh but ideally Bill if I could do that if one thing that I would do if I had you know my magic wand I would I would do that I would come up with a cohesive way to say this is a good estimated room integrated starch you there's some labs they measure it differently but they give something called room and availability different names but does that have any has anybody looked at does
(21:14) that lab value have any relationship to what you're trying to formulate >> so you know, I've I've been in uh I've talked like with Mike Allen a lot about that. Of course, he's retired now. Um and the the lab values, they definitely rank, you know, so if somebody is looking at a diet and then they send off the starch sample and it says, "Here's the 7-hour digestibility.
(21:41) " If it's higher, we know it's higher. If it's lower, slower. But it it's more of a ranking tool. We know doing that in vitro is really it's you know really tricky research to do. You overwhelm the system. It's not even you can maybe manage pH in it. But the microbes they take they break down the starch and then what do they do? They turn it into like this extracellular stuff that measures starch.
(22:07) >> So what does that mean? >> You know so uh it's it's I I understand why we do it. It's valuable but it's not going to give you the absolute value. I'm I'm afraid >> it gets us part of the way there. >> It gets us part of the way there and it's better than not doing it. Fecal starch, same thing.
(22:27) I I I I feel like if you get more digestibility in the room and you're going to get more digestibility in the total tract and less fecal starch. So, it's a good it's a good ranking and uh troubleshooting guide. If I were in the field, I I would definitely be doing that. I'm going to switch gears to fat. You know, ruminant fat na says it's average about 75% give or take a little bit which for all species that's really really low.
(22:59) What is it is it analytical issues to you know is it apparent versus true or is it something biologically limiting fat digestibility in in ruminants? I I think there is something limiting biological fat digestibility no doubt. Um you know pancreatic lipase is going to be less because the rin microbes just you know chop off all the fatty acids.
(23:25) Why would they need it evolutionarily? Why would they need it unlike a pig that has all kinds of it? Uh and but some of it's beyond that like the the the typical ways that work with lipase you know and and myel formation we've kind of reduced those. So like u phospholipids that are in the in the diet some of them can help to emulsify fat in the intestine and the microbes break them up.
(23:54) a monoglyceride like a pig eats a triglyceride, it it retains a monoglyceride that helps as a detergent to emulsify. So, one of one of the things that I think is I've sort of uh projected is that probably part of the microbes cell walls as they're being broken down, they probably help to emulsify the fat. They help the animal to to improve fat digestibility.
(24:21) And so, um, I think no doubt there's kind of a limit. You start feeding too much fat and that limit's way lower than in well, unfortunately for us people. Uh, so yeah, I think there there probably is the the digestibility, but I'm going to talk a little bit about we've we've come a long way at improving it.
(24:44) I mean since I remember doing this first study on uh partially hydrayzeed u >> hydrogenated >> hydrogenated fat >> and uh somebody telling me they fed it and then they kept slipping because it got >> excreted out and it was slippery. Uh you know so we've come a long way on that and the the companies have you know really really stepped up.
(25:06) So, you know, people like Adam, you know, th those those values are a lot better and it's, you know, we can we can get more energy in that way. Um, I'm going to talk tomorrow a little bit about why I think some of the some of the fatty acids, palmetic and oleic probably help the microbes. They probably can take them up and potentially even improve fiber digestibility.
(25:32) So, Adam's and his group have been talking about it. probably maybe you had something to do with that Kirby but everybody kept scratching their heads and say well that can't be right but I I think there's a real reason behind it a real mechanism and we should be trying to explore it and potentially you know use that opportunity >> and there's actually some neat data out of uh I think it was University of Utah or sorry Utah State University had an in vitro study looking at pulmitic acid and and it also bumped digestibility pretty clearly and they were looking at some
(26:00) microbial fractions and and microbial phosphol lipids. I think it was a neat data set that echoed a lot of what Dr. Lock has seen. >> Yeah, there's um I'm I'm going to go through a study tomorrow from Florida, but there's others. Ben Wner has done a study um that's that shows the same thing. It's it's pretty consistent.
(26:19) >> Any thoughts on how much you should supply to the rin as opposed to bypassing the rin? Well, you know the thing with palmitic acid, a bunch of it does kind of bypass, but it's more soluble than than steeric acid 180. So enough of it kind of like bumps into the microbes and they're probably are able to sort of add absorb it then it kind of like moves through their membrane and then they can then they can use it.
(26:46) So pro um you know I'm going to say tomorrow probably you've heard that many times today uh probably the the best way to improve fat digestibility with blending palmetic and oleic is probably the best way for the microbes to use it too. That's about the same proportion they need. So kind of just works out that way.
(27:06) >> Yeah. Interesting. >> So you know one and a half 2% of that kind of fat is probably has a potential to improve fiber digestibility. >> I know when I was in school taking lipids from Dr. Palmquist, it was everything was fat was negative on NDF and it was different fats back then, but I can remember lecture after lecture on how you have to incorporate the depression and fiber digestion when you're doing the economics on fat supplementation.
(27:37) You know, that's really interesting you bring that up because remember in you know NAS we kept talking about it and and like you know Lou Armano was was bringing up well you know a lot of those studies they fed a lot of fat because they're trying to prove something that's what we do when we design studies where we want to see it >> a significant difference so we put a bunch in but when you do kind of a moderate amount it usually doesn't depress fiber digestibility and before before you start depressing fiber
(28:06) digestibility ability, you're probably going to, you know, do something to milk fat or whatever first. >> So, a moderate amount is is probably not bad and pro probably good. Now has that improvement in fiber digestibility with very specific fat feeding has that been seen in vivo or is that mostly in vitro work then? >> Um both both u like I don't know how many studies Adam has >> more than five unless maybe not 10 but he's got a lot of studies repeatedly palmitic acid blends improve fiber digestibility.
(28:45) >> Yeah pretty stable two or three points I think. >> Two or three points. Yep. That's about right. >> Is there an advantage supplying that in the uh fatty acid form as opposed to triglyceride? Free fatty acids. >> Free fatty acids. Yeah, that's I think that's what you want. >> Yeah. >> In in your paper you talk about excess excess RDP being negative or potentially negative on fiber digestion which I thought was interesting.
(29:12) What what do you think the mode of action of that of excess of? Of course, excess is a lot, you know, like 20 uh something like that. >> It's not practical, but >> it's not practical, >> but why would that happen? >> Uh that's a really good question that I I want to ask your former grad student who who actually did that, >> Dave Jones.
(29:35) Uh um so I I I'm just guessing that you sort of are tilting to the wrong um grouping of microorganisms so that they don't work together as well as they should. One of the things we're really finding out is >> um so having worked with a bunch of really high high level microbiologists um the the kinds of microbes that you have in there is more complicated than we think.
(30:01) There's more of them within a species. They there's differences in in the kind that they are and the there are some that that sort of work together and the ones that work together that's the best way to to break down fiber and you start tilting it away from that and then they just start losing out because they just don't have I I just say it's like driving like we're driving around here.
(30:22) They don't have a parking spot to to initiate their colony and then next thing you know they're they're out. So I I just think it's a tilted population. >> So we know that we need some about more of RDP going in as we improve starch digestibility that that's kind of um something that you've established a bit too.
(30:50) So can we just classify that as RDP? Do we and you've talked a little bit about the amino acids and we obviously don't know the requirement there but if we just say say 10% RDP is where we want to focus or 9% RDP is that getting us by enough to keep fiber digestibil where we want it and coordinate with the starch or kind of what are your thoughts on >> um another thing that I I think you hit right on the nail right on the head we need to have adequate RDP for And if you know 10% maybe potentially more if if we have really highly
(31:28) degradable diets, really good quality feed stuffs. And then if we could, we would start looking at the kinds of degradable amino acids within there. And you know, like like all the systems, they assume every amino acid is degraded at the same rate. And of course, they're not.
(31:48) uh probably the branch chain amino acids are degraded at you know maybe a little bit different rate and so on like that. So that probably is exactly right. I think I think phenyl alanine is is a premium one for fiber degraders over and over the in vitro studies show it but it hasn't been done in vivo so we don't really know but I I think we'll be moving toward that if you know if we can get systems to be able to to do that.
(32:16) I I feel like we need to do amino acids. Nobody does amino acids in their studies anymore. You know, if we would start reporting amino acids and doing a better job of that, we would be able to to develop systems like a numm. I tried I looked over and over and tried to find every single paper with amino acids and they're just the studies aren't very well balanced.
(32:38) One will have soybean meal and this one and then the next study has something else. you have to have overlap across the studies to be able to have them all fit together. If you don't, then it's you you just run into pockets where the fitting processes don't work very well. So, but yeah, I think we'll find that in the future if we look for it.
(33:00) >> There we've talked about this over a lot long time. There's studies showing again very high RDP 12 13% and well above requirement intake keeps going up. Is this you think a a digestibility thing or is it something something else? It's more um is some of it is related to fiber digestibility and and reducing the fill limitation.
(33:26) So like that you're talking about there. They digest more. The cow can eat more because it's got more room in the rin. Rum in the rin. That's a good one. >> Uh, >> trademark fans. >> Yeah. >> Cha-ching. So, so some of it's that, but you know, in other in other animals, they find the same thing.
(33:49) I I had this conversation with Chris Reynolds 20 years ago when he was at OSU. They did a study one time where they infused ammonia into the into the blood and and it and it increased intake. >> There there's something about that uh the the the body is trying to to resolve do I have enough protein and so on before I want to do the other things like uh you know do I want it do I have enough to make more milk or whatever.
(34:17) So, I think there's more beyond just what the rumin that's going on. And um and like I said with other like with pigs and so on, they find the same thing. They you you it's not just getting more but maybe a better balance of amino acids in the blood. There there could be some way they're sensing that. So, yeah, I think I think that's and the flip side of that, Bill, if we start not having enough, we probably are more likely to limit feed intake.
(34:46) Maybe not just because of what's happening in the rin and then as you brought up especially as we have more room integrated carbohydrate there's more energy for microbes to grow they need more RDP >> so we should be formulating for you you brought up Will Hoover he used to he used to have a a a sort of a a thumb rule of so much non-fiber back when before we were measuring starch to RDP ratio >> we there's those um kind of relationships.
(35:19) They're there like the models are trying to account for them. Uh but no doubt that's that's an important feature. >> I had a question on the RDP kind of a ration balancing hypothetical. You know, a lot of the research that gets done in dairy nutrition is done in the upper Midwest and the Northeast where we're feeding diets that are 18 to 24 forage NDF.
(35:38) Um and I've got to know a few nutritionists out west. you know, they're often times feeding diets with 20 30% forage, 10 to 12 to 15% forage NDF, you know, that are going to be rapidly passing through the rin. Do you think that changes the percent dietary RDP that they should be targeting? Um, that maybe, you know, would make that more optimal.
(35:59) >> Oh, that's a good question, Kirby. Um, you know, I don't really have experience to to to go along with this, so I'll just speculate and you can decide if you want to keep. >> That's a podcast for four. >> Yeah, there you go. Uh, I I think probably the more adjustable things are, the uh the the probably the more RDP you need to have.
(36:21) The thing I have talked with people about in the West that you didn't mention, there's a lot of soluble fiber >> and we don't do a very good job of measuring it and figuring out how is who's breaking that down. I can tell you that the the microbes that break down the soluble fiber like pectins and so on, they probably also have negative effects from starch.
(36:42) >> So, you know, if you're limiting starch in the kind of diet that you put together like that, that's more opportunity for them. And we need to make sure we're providing the same nutrients like RDP or other other growth factors. Uh so soluble carbohydrates are really a neat thing that's been looked at somewhat by people like studying like cows eating pasture.
(37:05) There's lots and lots of that. >> And so just extrapolation I I would guess that there probably is a relationship and they're >> maybe not so much fill oriented. >> Right. Yeah. And of course, you know, the the flip side is when you have a lot of highly degradable forage, you need to have enough room uh compaction to be able to filter those and keep them in the rin.
(37:30) Otherwise, they just keep on going, >> right? >> Any other key points that you plan to cover tomorrow? >> Uh let's see. I can't really you you guys kind of stumbled across all these things. So, Bill did his homework. I don't know about you other two, but I see he's got a piece of paper there. Pretty much that's that's going to be be the nuts of it.
(37:55) I just got to try to shrink it into 30 minutes. So, >> yeah. >> Well, I I did want to ask one more question. Your student brought it up yesterday in their presentation about peptides and and the role of peptides in the room and I I was kind of just wondering if you could expand on that a little bit because it's a story I think needs developing.
(38:10) Okay. Uh, you know, so peptides are first of all, um, you love them and you hate them. There's no good way to measure them. Uh, I remember like in my multi-state project talking about this and, uh, so there really hasn't been been a good way. One of Glenn Brick's former students had had done this paper where they used this ultra uh, filtration that you can you can separate by molecular weight.
(38:39) At least that's consistent. All the other ones depend on the hydrophobicity of peptides and so on. So people are getting peptide values all over the place and it depended on how they did it. Now there's a a way you can actually measure it. So I'm actually kind of excited about it and it seems to work pretty well.
(38:59) So uh all the microbes in the rin, you know, not all of them break down protein. The cyolytics don't do that very well. They have proteasis that they need for their own internal functions, but they don't break down feed protein very well. And so they rely on other bacteria to do that and protozoa and then they feed them ammonia and the other stuff that they need.
(39:20) Well, the the bacteria that break down uh protein mostly are like starch users. And so what's what's encapsulating starch granules? Protein. They have to have proteasis to get what they want, but they don't have they don't have to have all the peptidasis to break down the protein that's been partially broken down.
(39:44) They don't they don't need peptidasis unless inside their their their cell is telling them they need more amino acids. Go get some. Go upregulate peptidasis. >> So they seem to be very very much under gene control. our models, we assume that it's constant. You put some protein in, RDP is the same no matter what kind of diet. Well, it probably isn't.
(40:09) And so, you know, we know that there's some soluble protein that passes the rin. It's probably all peptides. It's not the actual protein so much. It's the peptides. And then uh so we're we're kind of looking at is what kind of situation would help them to be broken down more. and they it does seem to be interacting with the branch chain BFA concentration.
(40:33) So, uh that's what she presented. So, I think we need to go back and you know this work hasn't been done since the 80s and 90s when you guys were talking about when you were born. But, uh but they did some great work back then and then molecular biology, you know, came into play and it was a whole lot easier to do that.
(40:53) So, I think peptides are going to be a part of the future in in dairy nutrition research. So, I don't, you know, without going into a bunch of science there, I I think it's it's really exciting. We should be doing it more. Got a lot to look forward to, Kirby? >> I think so. >> Good. Good. You know, as we wrap up here, what I'd like to do is just for each of you to kind of come up with a couple key takeaways for the audience and uh we'll just kind of go around the horn.
(41:22) And would you like to start over there, Laura? >> Sure, Scott. I'd love to go first on that one. >> Tonight's last call question is brought to you by Niasure precision release NASCIN. Niacin is a proven vasod diilator for heat stress reduction and a powerful anti-polytic agent for lowering high blood neifs. Protected with Bal Chem's proprietary encapsulation technology, you can be sure it is being delivered where and when your cows need it.
(41:49) Learn more at balm.com/niasure. I I think for me the biggest key takeaway is thinking more about that RDP and amino acid requirement that we have for the rin and to really start incorporating that in and taking into account the amount of fermentable starch and how as we improve the amount of fermentable starch that we need to think about the fact that we're going to have a larger demand for RDP and specific amino acids.
(42:19) So I think just keeping that in mind especially as we formulate for specific amino acid requirements of the cow herself that we need to not forget about the rin as we're doing that. >> Yeah, that's that's a really good point. And I would say not just rin fermentable starch but soluble fiber and really highly degradable fiber like that's with really good forages.
(42:44) Um, I still kind of come back that the cow evolves, you know, to break down fiber and, you know, we should be optimizing that. I think that's the best way that when we break down fiber better, we're going to get more milk fat. We're going to have higher intake and so on. And so, a lot of what I'm talking about is tomorrow is is going to be related to factors that affect fiber digestibility.
(43:09) But it's it's you know we we you know as Bill said you know we've been talking about it for 50 years. We've improved but there's still you know quite a ways to go. So >> I think before I'd give my final take home I I wanted to point out I was like this is the great part about having someone who's new to the Buckeye family and getting a chance to work in this place.
(43:31) The chance to work with the likes of Dr. Fkins and get to know Dr. Weiss is like just catnip for a young scientist. So you try to absorb as much as you can. So, I want to thank both of you guys for mentoring me along as I've transitioned into this role. But my takeaway is something um I've heard both of these guys say is that diet formulation is is not just putting something in, you're also take something out.
(43:50) So, you got to take that whole picture into consideration. It's it's not taking out starch put and or just adding starch. It's taking out soy holes or it's taking out little fat or it's putting in a little forage fiber. You know, it's a it's a calculus that we have yet to really understand. >> Great comments, Bill. I think you know we need to remember the limiting nutrient for milk is still energy that's still and it's been that way forever and so these little changes at one or two% change increase in digestibility is is huge and we we forget that you know it it's and so all
(44:25) this emphasis on all these little details that ma they matter even though the the the actual change in digestible or digestible energy might be small but that's if it's the limiting nutrient you will get a response. So >> yeah. Yeah. >> Again, it comes down to fiber to me. You know, we've done a lot to improve digestibility of everything else. Yeah.
(44:47) >> We talked about fat, we've improved that digestibility. Corn >> fiber even now it seems like we add 1% more starch, we take away a quarter of that that we give back because we're losing fiber digestibility. Do we really want to do that? We should be able to find a way to limit that that we give back that winds up, you know, in the manure pit and makes methane or whatever.
(45:17) We we should be able to improve it because we can and then try to get cows to eat more and have a just a little bit better diet along the way. So, yeah, that's uh that's what I'm going to try to hit hit home tomorrow. >> Yeah. Good. Good. Looking forward to it. So, I think that's a great stopping point. Uh, Jeff, this has been enlightening and it's been a lot of fun.
(45:38) So, I want to thank everybody for joining in on that. That this has been good. Laura, thanks for joining us here as as the co-host. You do a great job. >> Thank you. >> Even though you guys are so young, you guys do a great job. But, >> Kirby, thanks again. You're you're a rising star. Appreciate you.
(45:54) Bill, as always, it's been great. >> Loyal audience. Thanks for coming once again. Hope you learned something. Hope you had some fun. Hope to see you next time here at the Real Science Exchange where it's always happy hour and you're always among friends. >> We'd love to hear your comments or ideas for topics and guests.
(46:12) So, please reach out via email at anh.marketingb.com with any suggestions and we'll work hard to add them to the schedule. Don't forget to leave a five-star rating on your way out. You can request your Real Science Exchange t-shirt in just a few easy steps. Just like or subscribe to the real science exchange and send us a screenshot along with your address and t-shirt size to an&h.marketing balm.com.
(46:39) Balm's real science lecture series of webinars takes place on the first Tuesday of every month with the top research and nutrition topics that will impact your business. We also include small ruminant, monogastric, and companion animal focused topics throughout the year. Visit balm.com/realscience to see the upcoming topics and to register for future webinars.
(47:01) You can also access past webinars and search for the topics most important to you.