Designing Dairy 2045; VandeHarr, MSU; Baes, Guelph; Hostens, Cornell; Pollet, DMI - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pegZ7zcRcss

Transcript:
(00:08) Good evening everyone and welcome to the real science exchange the podcast where leading scientists and industry professionals meet over a few drinks to discuss the latest ideas and trends in animal nutrition. Uh in this episode we're featuring the participants of a panel discussion that took place during the opening ceremony last night at the 2025 American Dairy Science Association annual meetings.
(00:30) Uh the title of the panel was designing dairy 2045 envisioning the future of cows dairy products and farms. We'll explore long-term future of dairy and how our connected global scientific community is powering it. This dynamic panel discussion will delve into key themes shaping the next 20 years, including the evolving role of genomics in selecting more sustainable cows, the growing importance of consumer perceptions and the impact of artificial intelligence and sensor technologies.
(01:00) Now, Mike, this was your brainchild. I think you put this together, enticed people to come to the opening ceremonies. Uh, kind of give me some background how you came up with the idea and how did you come up with these speakers? Well, the opening session is uh has traditionally often been a a session where we talk about the business of ADSA and what has happened over the last year.
(01:22) And I thought I I would like to do something a little more interesting. Let's just put that in newsletter, save some for the business meeting and and uh make something more exciting. And we thought about, okay, it's 2025. It's good time to kind of reflect on where we are and where things are headed.
(01:40) And we thought about, oh, let's talk about 2050 and I don't know, 2045 sounded just had a bigger nicer catch to it. And um and then we thought we we don't want to just focus on one aspect of dairy and we want to make sure we include foods. So I thought, okay, if we're going to do that, let's let's think about cows. There's so much going on with genomics and and and we can the generation interval for uh cows right now is like two years and and the leading edge is even less than that compared to when I was in grad school 40 years ago was seven years.
(02:13) >> Yeah. >> So we can make changes so fast and genomics helps us do that. And I've worked with Chris uh on on a project in the last few years and so I knew Chris and I thought it she's she's got energy she'd be a great person. Uh then we thought we needed to include something about artificial insemin uh artificial intelligence.
(02:32) >> Uh and um I've known Neil for a long time >> and you know it's a brave new world and what dairy farming is going to be like in 10 years even could be just substantially different than it is today. And I thought Neil Neil just took a position at Cornell and this is his area. I thought he's a perfect person.
(02:52) Uh he covers health. He's a veterinarian but but he covers all this stuff related to data collection and sensors and so perfect person there and Eve I did not know >> but um I asked people in the foods group like who should we consider getting for foods and they said you know this uh Eve Plet from DMI is talking to the grad students on Tuesday uh about functional foods and the future of dairy products and I heard great things about her and uh so so We asked her and uh she was I love what you talked about last night. That was great.
(03:28) >> Thanks. >> No, I I got to tell you, Mike, you're you're absolutely right. We are in a brave new world in all aspects of the dairy industry and it's going to be very interesting. I >> hope around for the next 20 years to see what happens because there's going to be more take place in the next 20 years than has probably the last 100, right? It's going to be amazing.
(03:53) The economics of feeding reassure precision release choline. Reassure is fed during the transition period. And because it's fed for such a short period of time, it costs just $15 per cow. And yet the benefits will continue to generate income throughout the year. Cowsfed reassure produced 5 lbs more colostrum, which pays for your reassure investment on the very first day of lactation.
(04:18) Cowsfed reassure also produce 5 pounds more milk per day every day. That means after the first day. Every day is payday. Invest in reassure during the transition period and recoup your investment on the very first day of lactation. After that, you got it. Payday. Um Christine, now you're from the University of G and you're uh you gave a little talk uh on the future of cows.
(04:46) if you wouldn't mind kind of give us just a little bit of background on yourself and then what were some of the treetop themes of the the talk you gave and then the discussion you had after that. >> Sure. My name is as you said Christine Bass. I'm the associate dean of external relations at the University of G.
(05:01) Um until very recently I was the chair of the department of animal biosciences and at GE I hold a Canada research chair in livestock genomics. So, as Mike alluded to earlier, I am a geneticist and believe it or not, nutritionists and geneticists can get along. Um, we actually need to >> they really need to. It's so true.
(05:22) So, my talk kind of focused on what types of data can be collected on dairy cattle. Um, what kind of data have been collected in the past and where are we going with new types of data being collected? So, as a geneticist, we kind of see the world from a very limited view. We're just trying to get new phenotypes so that we can select for them.
(05:43) But the realization comes very quickly that you need to start working with the nutritionists and the veterinarians etc. to be able to better understand the biology behind those phenotypes. Um, our genetic evaluations are only as good as the traits that we're recording. And the closer you can get to the actual animals biology, the better your whole system is going to be.
(06:06) So we've both in the Canada and the US we've we've kind of developed these this infrastructure for genetic evaluation and we've we're collecting lots and lots of different traits almost 100 in Canada. Uh but with new technologies coming up we can actually get a lot better at what we do. So there's no limit really to where genetic selection and genomic selection in particular can take us.
(06:33) We just have to work really closely together to make sure that we're collecting the right information and using it in a in a good way. >> Well, that and making sure that we're we're meeting the nutrition requirements of this new cow that we we've created. Right. I've seen some graphs showing the the amount of genetic improvement just over the last 5 10 years relative to um um milk solids and it's amazing and I'm wondering you know we just had what the na mic what three or four years ago four years ago now and >> to me it seems like it's probably out of
(07:03) date right because it's a whole different cow that we're feeding today than we were feeding back you know four or five years ago >> yeah when I talk to nutritionists this is something we think about is you know we've the data from 40 years ago, especially when it comes to protein requirements, >> I don't know if that's relevant anymore, >> right? >> Uh growth rates are different for heers because of it too.
(07:26) And I think one of the things that's interesting that uh when we look at uh the m as we've selected for cows that produce more milk, I'm pretty sure we've selected for cows that do everything faster and their maintenance requirements are higher today too per unit of body weight. So uh yeah we we'll come back to that topic. >> Yeah. All right. Very well.
(07:46) Let's move on to uh Dr. Mir Meal Host uh from Cornell University. Mal, we met uh last year at the Carl uh Cornell nutrition conference and uh was hoping to get you on a podcast today and so here you are. Um your talk was about the future of farms. Give us first a little bit of background on yourself and then uh what were some of the the highlights of your talk that you gave.
(08:10) So I'm um I'm a an associate professor at Cornell University. I I in fact I take the uh Rob ever position which was the the guy that created all the test day um models at the in the US. Um and eventually what they were thinking about is finding in a geneticist as well. That was the initial idea at Cornell but the world changed quickly let's say over the last 10 years and Cornell was looking for somebody who was really focusing on the data science side.
(08:41) Um there's people often talk about sensors but if you think about what's going on in the world let's say it's it's that exact multimodality data comes from everywhere from pieces that we don't even think about. Uh previously let's say the the very data intense things were the genetics but now it's the sensor analysis all of these.
(08:58) So they were looking at Cornell for somebody. I um I was as a child I grew up on my grandmother's farm but she was always pushing me to do something with engineering let's say as well. I had a bit more of the computer science I don't know hobby almost. Um and ever since I started my vet degree I was thinking damn we should do this in a different way.
(09:19) This is not what we should be doing uh over 20 years. And this is where I am um as a veterinarian with a big passion let's say in in anything which is it computer science call me a big data geek I don't care uh but that's it so I work with anything that you can think about which is generating bits and bites on a farm and then try to relate this and this is has has been changing a lot where previously I would do this from a veterinary perspective an an animal health perspective I now do even the part parts of the genomic world work let's say Um, but always from the
(09:52) perspective of what can we do to help the industry, farms, whatever you can think about, but do it from a long-term perspective. I want to have my kids grow up on a world that's not screwed, let's say. And then uh that's for me the most important part why I do what I do. But it needs to be data driven.
(10:11) Gut feeling is good, but data is better. That's my my uh that's what I always say. So, >> and but my my impression is that we we've for many years had a lot of data. We didn't necessarily use the data. And so, is was that part of the talk you gave? Did did you talk a little bit about AI and the role that it might play in analyzing data and putting it into a form that we can use and put into practice? >> People love languages.
(10:36) >> Yeah, that's one of the the things that we really um know which works. talk if you talk somebody's language his own language that's that that bonds so and what has enormously changed our world is what happened over the last five years when openi came with chat GPT suddenly we could talk with people so indeed my group right now so for example one of the things I I showcased last night and and Mike is part of that small project that we're doing is we we we um read all the abstract or we had a let's say an existing b um language model that we
(11:11) trained with all the JDS abstracts that were ever published since 1917 to try to make chatbots more aware of what has been done in Journal of Dairy Science so that the answer that you get from a language model is now also fed by Journal of Dairy Science knowledge. Um so we're thinking about doing this with other journals as well so that we can really create a hub that would be able to answer people with the correct knowledge.
(11:38) Um given everything that you already published somewhere and now for example what is what's becoming possible at a at a bigger speed is we're thinking now of integrating even the farm information with that let's say functionality so that you could ask questions like hey this is my farm this is my data look at it and then tell me what to do next.
(11:59) given any subject that you can think about. So that's something that we couldn't even imagine 10 years. I know when I started dreaming about this, I dreamt about getting all the data together, but now I even have the possibility to say we get the data together, but next let's reason about it. And that's something that I didn't expect it at all.
(12:15) But then suddenly the world changed and this is going quick and uh it's even going at a pace that I couldn't imagine uh would be possible, but it's happening. >> Yeah. Yeah. Do do you have a crystal ball? What's it going to look like in 20 years? I mean, can you even can you even imagine it? >> Yeah, I just look at the other let's say just look at the other industries.
(12:34) So, it's it's not a um it's not a secret anymore. Chat GPT wants to know what you are. >> Yeah. and they will give you answers tailored to what you are, who you are, why you are there, if you're, let's say, if there's information about you, about medical records, and they will tailor tailor your answers to what you really need.
(12:59) Honestly, I think this is going to go exactly in the same direction for Dary, but we're not there yet. People will overpromise that we're there, but it's not happening. If you know that OpenAI which is a billion company that it's not happening yet but step by step we'll go into a situation where you can get really tailored answers on a farm on a policy on a on a governmental level you'll be able to scrape like I always one of the things I'm thinking about right now is let's get all the policy documents together and try to fit them onto a farm because I can't I cannot
(13:29) imagine how difficult it is nowadays to even think about a policy which fits into a governmental structure, a federal structure which then needs to fit your cows like do I need to for example the question is my farm good enough to start breeding for methane given the policy in which I am >> that's a kind of a question where we we that's a very complex thing if you think about or does it make sense from an economic perspective so then you have to have market information coming in and of course it's possible on a one-time scale
(13:57) but nowadays I think we're heading to a situation where those things will become possible that it understands let's say the the whole environment, the ecosystem, but then comes with a very tailored advice to your dairy or even to your cow. What do I need need to do with this cow given that you know this about my farm, given that you know that it's in this country? >> Yeah.
(14:17) >> That's the thing that we would never dream about being possible, but we're getting there. >> Yeah. Yeah. Fun stuff. >> Fun stuff. That's for sure. >> For sure. >> For sure. A lot to do. >> Yeah. Eve, your topic was the future of milk. So first again uh tell us a little bit about yourself and then tell us about your uh your talk.
(14:33) >> Yeah so DMI is a great convenor of industry and so DMI works on behalf of industry. One of the things that we do is we have a strategic intelligence department that looks at consumer insights and market market research and insights. So what I do for DMI is I look at the future for the industry and bring it to industry and look at what is the next five and 10 years going to look like through different data sets, different sources and project out and then we work future back and we ask ourselves what are the strategies that
(15:05) we need to take on for industry and what are the things that industry needs to take on to build towards a future where dairy can continue to be a leader. Dairy is really back in culture right now. I would say if we were having this panel six years ago, alternatives were growing.
(15:24) The conversation around dairy was very negative. That is shifting. Um, and I think that is shifting for a lot of reasons. That's another podcast. But dairy is really becoming seen as a health and wellness food. So then the question becomes, as it should, right? Yeah. The question becomes what is the future of health and wellness and what do all the scientists here need to do to build towards that future.
(15:49) So a lot of the technologies that this group is talking about the Fitbits on the cows measuring milk components through robotics and other means that all actually came on farm first but now it's coming to humans. So, I'm wearing this ring. You cannot tell. This ring is tracking more and and knows more about my body than I do and my doctor does.
(16:10) So, today consumers are looking for health and wellness products and they're looking for food and beverage to actually solve for health conditions. When we're looking out to 2045, 20 years from now, what that's going to look like, this ring combined with chat GPT that knows me, right, and my preferences is going to tell me exactly what to eat.
(16:33) I'm going to say, "I'm at this conference right now. This is the food spread for lunch. What do I eat?" >> Yeah. It's going to know your genome. It's going to know everything. >> It's going to know everything about us, and it's going to make us healthier. Of course, there are downsides. What's it going to say about my bourbon? I'm going to >> Exactly.
(16:51) Exactly. It's going to tell you that it impacts your sleep, unfortunately. So, you're going to want to take this ring off if you're going to have some. But, but the question is, how can we look at the black box? And I'm calling dairy and milk a black box because we know so much about the components of what's in dairy and dairy has been widely studied, but we don't know it all.
(17:14) and technology and the advancements of high throughput machines, massspec, NMR combined with computer science and what we can really do with data and AI today is going to enable us to look at the magic of what's in this incredible superfood and to design the foods of the future tailored to this group. And we might find Michael and I might find we're actually the most similar of this group than anyone else in terms of what our body needs.
(17:39) We might find a lot of similarities, but the point is how are we going to uncover what's in dairy, what it does, and how it can really help solve the health and wellness needs of the future for consumers. >> Talking about the future of consumers, to to me, my impression is it's very fat driven in terms of what >> humans want and need and and and so how do you how do you predict that, right? and and and it's not all science-based and based on what's good for you, right? I mean, we were eating uh biohydrogenated fats for a long time,
(18:13) which we found out are killing us and >> Right. >> So, how do you how do you stay ahead and and anticipate what consumers are going to want and need? >> What you do is you know more about your product than anyone else on the planet does. And how you do that is through technology and science. >> Okay? >> Because needs are always going to change, right? It was keto.
(18:33) We're a great keto food, right? depending on what we do. Then it was low sugar. Still low sugar. Low sugar is growing immensely right now. That's why yogurt is up over 10% in sales this year. >> Um but there are always going to be we discovered this, you eat this, high protein this. We're actually positioned really well in all those trends, but that's because of the science.
(18:56) That's because of the dairy scientists and the dairy community that knows about the components in our products that can solve for those needs. So yeah, you're right. It's always going to change, but how can we We're an incredibly versatile food. We're we're a platform as a food. Um, and how can we uncover what's in us and what we can do on a new level.
(19:17) So, you know, I don't know if we were going to get here. I know you might want to get here, but we didn't talk about this last night, but we talked about this before, which is, you know, lab grown dairy, right? And precision fermentation. While people are looking at how to replicate the magical components in dairy, what else is in dairy? Let's look at what else is in dairy.
(19:39) Let's look at how the components in dairy work together magically to solve those problems. So, that's the next not fad but market trend that that's coming and know more about our product than anyone else. >> Yeah. Christine, as I hear you talking about, you know, designing foods for the future and and uh I'm kind of curious.
(19:58) Do you think we'll be designing cows that create foods uh specifically for human consumption? You know, changing the the output of those cows. You see that coming? Is that anything that folks like yourself think about? >> For sure. We've we've it's already been published actually the the different types of proteins, the different types of fatty acids in milk, the different matrix that is milk.
(20:23) You know, you can get right down to the myel size and thickness of the fat globules in the milk and those are heritable traits, meaning that there's genetic variation and you can actually see the differences between different breeds. So if there is the opportunity to grow the market in specific areas, there's a gargantuous opportunity to do it in quotation marks naturally as opposed to doing it through food processing, which I think is the the one beautiful thing about milk is that it's such a natural product.
(20:54) It it is what it is and it's not just a chemical. Sometimes we've reduced it to a chemical, but you can't just smash it apart and put it back together again. Um, in doing that, you may change that matrix. >> So, if you can get it the way that it that you want it to be straight out of the cow, that's even that's even more compelling of a case for marketing, for selling, for in in today's world, I think.
(21:19) >> Yeah. You know, one of the things that we've thought about before is, you know, Balkam, we we uh we manufacture choline. Well, milk is one of the the richest sources of choline, natural choline. Uh and we've often wondered is there some things that we can do to increase, you know, either by feeding uh the cows more choline to to actually get more choline into the milk.
(21:40) But uh anyway, it's just something we talk about around the coffee uh machine. Mike, kind of like to pass the ball to you. You were there last night, heard these uh great discussions. What were some of the the key takeaways, some of the key learnings that you came away with? Well, there are a few questions we didn't get to afterwards and uh one of them I think would be interesting uh to talk a little bit about is when you look at the future of cows uh you know over the last 100 years 80 years we've increased average production from about
(22:13) 2,000 lers maybe or even less up to about uh we're at almost about 11,000 lers so what uh 24,000 pounds uh in North America America right now and there's no evidence that that's slowing down. Maybe in the last year there was a little bit of a drop, but I mean where are we heading is a question that people have.
(22:37) In 2045, what's the average cow going to produce in Michigan? We have a lot of herds at 30,000 33,000 lbs. That's just that's pretty common. >> The herds that are going to be around are are those herds. They're the ones that are sticking around. Where are we headed? >> What do you think? I think that we've got a huge um we still have a lot of opportunity.
(22:57) The fact that there are those 33,000 lb herds means that that's not the physiological limit quite yet. Um what needs to be done though is we need to get the environment that those cows live in. We need to get their diet straightened out just like with humans, right? If you look at total fantastic athletes, they've the they're really looking after themselves well.
(23:18) And if we can get the management side of things up, it doesn't high production doesn't necessarily mean that you're going to have low fertility or you're going to have bad health or troubles with metabolic diseases. It means much more that you have a very fine-tuned, welloiled machine that can produce hopefully up to its potential.
(23:41) and everything we do around that cow has to move towards allowing her to reach her potential. So the physiological limit I personally I don't think we've hit it yet, but I think we need to do everything we can with all the sensors, with all the different technologies that are coming in with all the understanding of nutrition and behavior and welfare and genetics to make sure that everything is as perfect as it can be.
(24:07) Yeah, there's no question that uh geneticists have had a huge impact on cows in the last 80 years because you can see when when when the whole science of quantitative genetics started is when the the the milk production really started ramping up. Uh and but if if we don't have the right veterary care, the right diets, those cows won't perform.
(24:32) >> It's like a Porsche maximum. Yeah. Right. >> It's like someone driving a Porsche who doesn't know how to drive a car, right? or a or a Lamborghini, you've got a fantastic machine and if you're not, you know, driving it properly, then it's not going to work for you. >> The only the thing that I would love geneticists to think a little bit more about and and because we have breeding indexes, we breed for a lot more than just right now I think net merit is less than half on milk production, but it's close to half and it's for protein and
(24:59) fat. Uh, I think health will become a bigger part of the future, especially as we have all this sensor data so that we have information on every cow and we know what her genomics are and we can start to breed more for health. Because, you know, as a nutritionist, we've we've increased feed efficiency because we've diluted out the proportion of an animal's food that's needed for maintenance.
(25:29) But we've increased the maintenance requirement as we've bred for more milk. So feed efficiency, I'm not sure we're going to get that much better as we keep going up. >> And if you look at uh uh so so for total feed efficiency or and even methane per unit of milk, uh it's probably not we're not going to get that much better just by increasing milk production.
(25:53) And by increasing milk production, we keep breeding for cows with bigger utters. I wonder what consumers are going to think when they see a cow that's got this enormous udder compared to her body size. So, I think health and uh what do consumers think would be important and I'm just going to toss it over to to Emil and Eve with that question.
(26:11) >> I I have some numbers in mind that I always challenge people about. I I did the calculations. the best cow in the world right now, the Japanese cow. Um, if you would have only her, you only need uh 5% of the animals in the world to feed the population like you were projecting that did that calculation, it's only 5%.
(26:30) So, if we can find out a way that we can understand what we need to do to just not we don't so if we don't even improve genetics anymore because there's an animal that did it already. So, it means that the genes are there with the right let's say environment to do to do the phenotype which is the high molecule. We don't need like we would be able to do it with 5% of the animals.
(26:48) The problem is and now I'm going to generalize a lot and this is going to jump to the methane discussion. We're adding 10 million animals per year on this planet still. And that worries me and that worries me from the perspective and this is beef and dairy altogether. So, but we're adding an entire America in dairy cows to the planet in animal numbers every year still.
(27:11) And >> where's that taking place? Geography >> everywhere in the world. everywhere >> everywhere in the world and of course it's not in the US let's say where it's like almost stable Europe >> is probably quite stable as well thinking about diminishing and the people which are the non-efficient people let's say well this is very bad and I don't want to this is not what I want to say in a negative way but it is what it is happening is >> we're not like and that's where I get challenged in especially on the on the
(27:38) AI side and and whatever you can think about let's try to understand what we're doing well in Michigan or in Canada or whatever and try to get that knowledge as soon as possible to people who are thinking about increasing their population because they need the they need the protein, they need let's say the the bioactive compounds, whatever you want to and that worries me a lot like we're focusing a lot here, but we need to focus on okay, what do we do here and how do we get it into their own system and and and and change let's say
(28:09) at a quicker speed because if we're doing exactly what we have been doing at the speed and the and let's say and the in the increases that we see around the globe that's going to be challenging. >> Yeah. >> I wish everybody was producing 33,000 kg of milk. Um is it milk 33,000? Yeah, that's the one. Yeah.
(28:29) So 35,000 is the highest one right now. I wish everybody did because then we didn't need the animals. >> Um am I am I against the animals? No. No. The only thing I'd challenge you on that is when you put beef and dairy industries together, if we have fewer dairy cows, >> maybe we because dairy farms make just not just milk but also beef >> if they do it right.
(28:50) >> Correct. >> If we have fewer dairy cows, do we need more beef cows to to raise the young ones for for making beef? I don't know. And that's why I think maybe we need to focus more on health, >> productive uh yeah, productive life. Although I think three years is fine. I want to I want cows to I want to sell them from the farm when I would still like to eat them myself.
(29:14) >> Yeah. >> Uh >> yeah, >> health I think is a big one. >> Health is health is huge. I think the So going back to your comments earlier about body maintenance requirements for example there is already also evaluations genetic evaluations for body maintenance requirements. They haven't been implemented in the states yet but in in Canada we just they just got launched I think.
(29:34) So together with methane efficiency and feed efficiency these these animals are being selected for efficiency so to say. Now your comments about health are are really important because we can and we do start to breed for metabolic disease for example, ketosis, all the different things that are really measurable but also from a costs standpoint measurable which is really important to your point me about um you know maybe the global south and the production of food in areas where you can't be so um high efficient.
(30:11) it is a problem. You need 273 cows in Tanzania to make the same number of same amount of milk as you need like two cows in in the US. That being said though, I think that strategy could start at a much easier spot. You know, you could start just with genetic evaluation programs that are organized.
(30:32) Ear tagging selection. We don't need to be breeding for methane efficiency >> in Africa >> yet. >> Right. Someday for sure. Absolutely. But you need to go through all of the motions >> and and it's not rocket science. Genetics is a pretty it works, right? It's a pretty simple path. Take a group of animals, >> keep the best ones, and get rid of the non-efficient ones in terms of milk production first because that will absolutely reduce the number of cows.
(30:59) We had in in Canada in 1960, there were three and a half million cows. Today, we have less than a million and they produce more milk >> than they did in the in the 60s. So I think absolutely there's but we need those phenotypes. So we do have to talk to each other. We do have to understand okay what is it now in North America in the global north what are the traits that we can hone in on and improve and that story is going to be very different in countries that are maybe a little bit less efficient and less set
(31:29) up with infrastructure to be able to get an organized breeding program going. But we need to have them make we we need to avoid that they make mistakes whatever we can call it that we made before which slowers the rate of implementation what you're saying like we need to indeed help them implement genetics at a quicker speed in their own language again I go back to my chatbot idea yeah nutrition the same how do we get the nutritional insights that we have we know how to feed cows to produce 35,000 kilograms of milk because we have one
(32:00) that does it so we know how to do it but how do we translate it so that everybody can use it. That's the >> And we've also got I mean we've got water, >> we've got roads, we've got um cooling systems, right? Like there's a there's a whole bunch of things that we don't understand about food production. I was in the Philippines a month ago there's 7,000 islands >> in the Philippines like and 114 million people.
(32:26) Like how do you get milk from >> one place that's produced to the next and it's hot and then there's a hurricane, right? Like it's >> it's pretty tough. Yeah, it's pretty tough. It's interesting to understand that that the knowledge that we have in this imagine that you could capture all the knowledge in this building right now >> and bring it and then say what do I have to do now >> if I want to improve my output or whatever and that it produces the right answer given what we know in this room that would be that's what we're that's what we're heading to but it will take
(32:52) some time but it would be amazing to because that's what often let's say if you if you give a talk to farmers they sometimes tell you Christine I would love to have your head and and use it all the time for my own dairy. That's what and this is now possible and that's what we're looking at.
(33:07) That's what they are saying. Look at my data. That's what they ask Christine. What if I look at your farm? What would you do? That's exactly where we're heading to where suddenly there's a thing that will be able to say, "Hello, I'm Christine Bas and I'm your new chatbot agent and I'll help you out." But that's and and and that's that's what I think I I envision that as part of what we we'll be doing in 2050. I hope we will be doing it.
(33:34) That's a so that but that's yeah. So, so I want to head toward Eve here like so how do we and I would say f even five years ago my mindset was what when we think about consumers we're worried about what do what do consumer consumers think about what we do on dairy are and are they are they accept do they think the way we take care of cows is okay what I when I heard you last night I'm thinking you know is we're moving we still have to we still have do good animal care partly because it's the right thing to do
(34:09) >> and because we don't want consumers seeing us beat up cows or whatever, right? But what you said was we're we're also moving toward this place where consumers really care about functional foods. >> And one of the questions last night had to do with yeah, how do we how do we go all the way from genetics and nutrition up to the consumer and functional foods? Mhm.
(34:33) >> Uh the the whole path I had the same question like you you you talked about functional foods a lot. >> Mhm. >> But you just said it as well the matrix as such. >> Yeah. >> How do you look at for example the idea that people sometimes also say like it's ultrarocessed >> and if you like there's a there's a dangerous let's say there's functional food and ultrarocessed.
(34:57) So >> let's keep it as a whole. That's what I was I was thinking in my head. Let's keep it as a whole. And you said it as well like it the the matrix as such is already but how do you look at that like >> well it's it's like I said it's and I'm borrowing this from other scientists I've worked with this this concept that the matrix is a black box.
(35:14) We don't know exactly how it works. We know that dairy is healthy for you. We know dairy milk cheese and yogurt are healthy for you and butter are healthy for you but we don't necessarily understand all of the components. And yes, consumers do want clean whole foods. And that's why genetics is so important because you can just breed for certain components that come out of the cow without a ton of processing, right? And that's that's why genetics will become even more important in the future.
(35:44) But a first step is, you know, what's in this blackbox matrix? How does it work together? And how does it work in the body? You know, there's a matrix for cheese, there's a matrix for yogurt, a butter, milk, etc. And so that's really important and um consumers are going to want both, right? So some people put protein powder in their coffee or collagen in their coffee is a huge trend right now.
(36:08) It's called profane coffee. >> Um and so >> I'll take it. And so these are the same consumers, by the way, who are asking for clean whole foods, but in that morning occasion, they'll have the collagen and the coffee because they know that it's super healthy for them, for their joints, etc. if they have it each day. And so I think it's yes end.
(36:31) I think we're moving towards a future that's yes end. But consumers will know the truth about how foods work in their body because they'll have the technology to tell them. There are a bunch of con companies now that can measure your blood and connect with your wearables. And so consumers will be able to see the truth on a level that we're not prepared for.
(36:56) So let's prepare for it on farm to our product, right? They'll know the truth about whether something's healthy for them or not. and they'll understand and be able to have a bit more insight into onfarmm practices and an understanding around practices in order to form an opinion. So to go back to the questions, are consumers going to be, you know, concerned with the size of the udder or certain specifics, I don't think they're going to compare a before and after, right? They just want to know that the animals are cared for.
(37:27) But there's going to be a higher level of transparency because we're going to see companies enable transparency into onfarmm practices in different ways through different technologies. We're going to see some first movers um doing that and then that's going to create an expectation that there's transparency around what's in the product, what it does and what's happening on farm.
(37:51) So I think it's a you know it's it's a bit of both, right? Consumers want health and wellness. They also want to know that their product is made sustainably and that the animals were cared for. Um, consumers want it all, right? Like that's that's the that's the reality. >> The only thing that I was thinking when you were talking about yesterday, for example, the indeed it's it's interesting that you can think about the ring, which I want to see eventually because I I was thinking about who buys it.
(38:17) So, I found the first buyer. Mhm. >> Um, >> and then you showed the the the I think the lady that was having five was it 5 million followers. >> The only glucose goddess >> glucose goddess. The only thing what I was I'm worried about at that moment is >> these people are very influential but N is one. >> N is one.
(38:37) That's that person with that genome with that specific let's say body type with that background. She's measuring it and it works out for her. But the thing is we're we know that's why we're here in this building that you need to have an experiment. You need to have >> absolutely >> that say we're not all the same and that's the one that was so I liked it a lot but at the same time I was like damn but >> if you follow it and you think that's the truth suddenly absolutely >> the generalizability is the one thing that we need to and that's where science
(39:01) indeed needs to step in and say like hey glucose goddess >> let your n is one and let's do this in a in a bigger scale and understand what's going on. So that was the only thing. Yes. And Yes. And what I didn't show, what she does is she crowdsources people's results. And she'll show her results next to her friend and they both had the same food and it spiked her and it didn't spike her friend.
(39:24) And then the question becomes why? And you can go down a whole rabbit hole. But that means that she needs to eat differently, right? And everyone will eat differently and have different preferences. But the technology doesn't I shouldn't say this. I will regret this, but the technology doesn't lie, you know, in terms of what's going on in your body.
(39:44) >> Um, and so it it is N of one. And so how do you we're a giant industry design foods for N of one. And that's where we need to look at the commonalities between people. And you know, when you look at women versus men, we have a hormonal cycle. We go through different stages, right? Perry postmenopause becoming a huge cultural conversation.
(40:06) and maybe the foods that worked for you in your 30s and 40s aren't going to work for you in your 50s and 60s. So, you know, how can we be prepared for that? >> I think it's super cool that there's there's such a realization almost of the variation within the population. You look at holing cows for example, they all look the same, but actually they're not. that you know like 99.
(40:29) 7% of their genome is identical but it's that 7%.3% that's that's different that causes >> this incredible amount of variation and it's it's even bigger in humans. So finally the understanding that when you go to the doctor and they say oh you've got >> XY Z that might not be true that might not be your problem right or this is the you know you should try cutting out dairy.
(40:56) Yeah for some people maybe but probably there's might be something else behind it and understanding that there is differences in there is huge. Right. >> I think you're right. I think we're going to find in a lot of cases the people that were told to cut out dairy had a different problem that we couldn't see until we we saw it with technology.
(41:11) And I think that will be really interesting in the next 10 20 years. >> That's the paradigm of science making it generalizable. But because of that doctors rely on the generalizability and they make mistakes which could be shown by a Fitbit or whatever that Yeah. that that's and that's where we're heading. It's it's personalized medicine eventually. It's personalized medicine.
(41:30) It's personalized veterinary medicine, targeted, whatever you want to >> but and that's where we need to make steps at at all different levels and then combine it. That's >> Mhm. >> I don't know if I will see it happen on the farms, but um I'm definitely working to it. >> Super cool. >> Yeah.
(41:48) What would you say the biggest gap is today in terms of uh data that we we don't have for dairy cattle and what kind of sensors are going to be required to get us there? >> Okay, I'm Yeah, >> I have one bias but >> yeah and I was going to say something similar to what you said. It's dangerous to say but we we have enough. Honestly, we have I think we at this moment I would say we have enough.
(42:09) There's definitely possibilities there will be in let's say what I think like the people continuously measuring their glucose levels that's something that we will see in cows as well where you have in in body measurements I I I think that will be coming but we have the full genome maybe we'll go to an RNA sequencing for animals at a certain moment where we try to understand the gene expression more um but if we would have from every animal a genome you have the activity you have her health.
(42:40) That's the challenging one. How do you find an health? >> We have a lot vision is going to tremendously change our world. Um because we'll be able to >> we're working on a project right now where we're where you're able to almost say like, "Hey, can you show me any can you show me the most remarkable videos of this animal on this farm?" So you could go back in time and see when she started deviating her behavior so that you can ask for it like, "Hey, this animal was on your farm and suddenly became sick. Can you show me the first
(43:09) signs just to understand what so those things we are there the challenge right now is at this moment it's especially the collaboration between the companies because they all have one there's one for the methane there's one for the behavior there's one from the for the animal health and there's the big and that's of course people know me for that that my my push for that is it's the integration but people are aware that of course like just like open AAI they try to know it And it's the idea that there's companies
(43:40) that want to know it all. Um, and who's going to be the first? That's the question. Who's going to be the last? I I I don't have a crystal ball on that one, but we'll we'll have to collaborate more. That's for sure. >> Mike was talking about uh feed efficiency a little while ago. And to me that there's a gap there in understanding the dry matter intake of of dairy cattle.
(44:02) We know what the pin's eating, but I'm understanding there's a lot of variation between animals and do we really >> You got me on that one. That one would be interesting, too. But again, the vision. >> Yeah, >> probably. But then you have eating time, not the eating kilograms or amounts. Yeah, that one I would Yeah, if you can find one to >> invest in that one.
(44:22) I would say SC if there's a company that I would invest. That's >> the Danish are there. They've got uh the seafood technology so they they can actually use with video uh recording of the feed bunk they can actually measure how much every individual animal has eaten with with cameras and and with >> quite a bit of accur like surprising accuracy.
(44:41) >> Okay. um >> variation especially they are I think they're using it in in the genetic evaluation already but the exact they're very precise accurate what is it again the so they they can measure indeed the variation well but the exact amount which is the thing that we would like to know is always a challenge uh >> well for for selection you don't really need to know right and if you have enough numbers you're you're totally okay you can you can pretty much do it >> and and you know how much the group is eating Yep.
(45:12) >> So you could you could get close >> allocate the variation. Yeah. >> And then if we had a say a green feed in every group and had a little bit of data on methane from what we would also have CO2 so we could look at gas exchange. We could predict heat output from each of those cows. >> We could get an idea of how much they're eating.
(45:32) >> There's sniffers. There's there's all kinds of new technologies coming out. And I think with regards to the health traits too, like if an animal, even with young calves, if you if you are feeding your calves with a with a feeding with an automated feeding system, you can tell pretty quick when they're starting to go off feed, right? And the activity monitors if they're not moving as much anymore.
(45:54) You can totally start to see that. Now, the real time translation of what that means and whether or not you need to get a vet trinarian in is is another question, but you're I agree with me. We're there with the tech. We're there. Of course, we need to continue to refine, right? When an airplane takes off, you got to adjust your flaps, but you we need to really work hard on identifying where we need to do better.
(46:19) And that's already going to give us enough to chew on for the next couple years, I think, to make sure that they stay healthy and and productive. >> I got to tell you, I could do this all day. This is this has been fascinating, but uh we're up against a a time crunch here.
(46:36) What I'd like to you guys to do is just kind of give us a few takeaways that you'd like to share with the audience of things that that that you think they need to know and take from this this discussion. Eve, if you don't mind, would you like to start us off? >> Tonight's last call question is brought to you by Nitrasure Precision Release Nitrogen.
(46:53) Nitrushure delivers a complete TMR for the rin microbiome, helping you feed the microbes that feed your cows. To learn more about maximizing microbial protein output while reducing your carbon footprint, visit balcom.com/nitroshure. >> Yeah, sure. Um I think that we're going to see, you know, an incredible amount of data integration onfarm um with the consumer, right? um from onfarmm to consumer.
(47:22) And I think that it's our job again to know everything about our product and what it does for the human body, everything about what we need to do to enhance practices. And I think when we can do that, we can compete in really any environment in the future, right? A future where consumers are going to know more about their bodies or their technology is going to know more about their bodies than they do.
(47:50) a future where you're going to be able to shop and chat GPT is going to tell you what to buy based on whatever attributes you want. I want this product to be this sustainable or this have this health and wellness attribute or benefit. We can position ourselves well for any system in the future by really doing the job to look inside our product and our practices and use AI and technology to help us get there.
(48:17) And then I think you know if we can if we can do that you know dairy can dairy can really do anything we need to in the future. Yeah. >> Yeah. Wow. Great comments. Neil, what kind of comments do you have? >> Yeah. Similar. It's um gut feeling is good. Data is better. AI will help entangle this. Let's say let's say uh open up the black box of the data.
(48:43) Um look look forward to it but don't believe everything they're telling you right now. Be critical. it's still a black box. Um, that's uh the other takeaway and let's keep this community of dairy scientists together to create the knowledge and and make sure that the let's say that the AI doesn't have to live on itself that it's being fed by knowledge that is really scientifically driven.
(49:05) So that's >> that's what I would say. >> Yeah, good point Christine from a genetics perspective. >> Yeah, I I agree with with Eve and Neil. I think in addition to that, we really need to communicate with each other. You know, Mike and I have this little rivalry that we poke at each other. He's a nutritionist and I'm a geneticist and we love to kind of >> throw that out there.
(49:24) And it's the same with veterinarians and genetic. We just have to really >> we've got to do better and we have to work together and we have to understand that other people might have knowledge in an area that we just don't. Like if I'm looking at phenotypes for for health and welfare, I'm a geneticist. I got to stay in my lane.
(49:43) I need to talk to a veterinarian. Yeah, I need to talk to someone who understands health and vice versa. So, I think moving forward all the things that Eve and Neil said and in addition, collaboration, cooperation, um, and understanding how really amazing cows are. Like, you still need to know about your cows.
(50:03) you still need to understand that they're biological organisms and that they're they're alive and that there's this this compassion that you do have to consider somewhere or else you're just looking at them like machines and that's not the case either. So I think everyone here at this conference also feels very passionately about what they do and I think we're in good hands.
(50:23) We just we just got to keep going. >> Yeah. So collaboration's the key. Don't want to go down a rabbit hole but how do we do that? Should we have the uh more geneticists here? Should we have veterinarians at this conference? Should we have >> I love I love working with veterinarians. I love working with some veterinarians.
(50:42) I love working with some nutritionists. I got to be totally honest, right? It's true because once you find a person who you can communicate with and who understands you and who understands that you're on the same page and you're on the same team and you're not trying to oneup them or or whatever, then then you're on a path because you're concentrating on the task at hand.
(51:00) And the task at hand is improvement because it's an industry that we depend on in some ways, but it's so much more than that. Agriculture overall is so much more than just trying to make money. >> Yeah. Otherwise, we wouldn't I mean, if we really wanted to make money, we probably wouldn't be we probably wouldn't be doing what we're doing.
(51:18) But I think that that human that human connection is really important and and having a common goal is really exciting because then you start to learn. That's where you're kind of challenging yourself to move to the next level and and get more information. I don't know enough about what Neil does or what Eve does, but I can understand already now after this conversation, >> there's a million things that we could do together.
(51:43) Yeah, >> just understanding that I think is good. >> Yeah, great comments. Love it. Mike, put a bow on it for us. >> So, uh, in 2045 is the way I started my talk last night. We're going to have almost 10 billion people, uh, less land to grow food, uh, warmer climate, and, uh, we need to we we need to be prepared for that.
(52:06) And I think dairy has a bright future. >> Yeah. Uh I think a few years ago some of us were wondering where we would fit and then you had things like perfect day coming along with their milk that's going to come from test tubes and but I think uh you know with all the the the the new ways that we can handle cows uh I think that uh and the fact that dairy cows can be net food producers.
(52:29) There's there's data out there from people who aren't dairy scientists that show that you can feed more people using some of our some of some of the food that people could eat even could be given to those cows and we get more food for people from the cows than we than we could than if we didn't use cows in our agricultural system >> and healthier food.
(52:48) >> So yeah, and and then there's this whole functional food thing that we're looking at. So >> I think dairy has a bright future. Um, I would like consumers to to understand that we, the scientists and the folks in the industry care more than just making a profit. Uh, I talked about uh the fact that we want to I want to show them that we all want to be good stewards.
(53:13) We want to make efficient use of resources. We want to treat animals with respect and care. We want to produce quality food for the people that are going to eat it. >> Um, anyway, I think dairy has a bright future. I think I'll just close with that. >> Yeah, great way to stop. That's a That's a good one, Mike. Listen, folks.
(53:30) Want to thank you so much for joining us here today. This has been a lot of fun. To our loyal listeners out there, I hope you had as much fun as I did. I hope you learned something and I hope to see you next time here at Real Science Exchange where it's always happy hour and you're always among friends.
(53:44) We'd love to hear your comments or ideas for topics and guests. So, please reach out via email at anh.marketingbell.com with any suggestions and we'll work hard to add them to the schedule. Don't forget to leave a five-star rating on your way out. You can request your Real Science Exchange t-shirt in just a few easy steps.
(54:05) Just like or subscribe to the Real Science Exchange and send us a screenshot along with your address and t-shirt size to an&h.marketing@balm.com. Balcom's real science lecture series of webinars takes place on the first Tuesday of every month with the top research and nutrition topics that will impact your business. We also include small ruminant, monogastric, and companion animal focused topics throughout the year.
(54:30) Visit balm.com/realcience to see the upcoming topics and to register for future webinars. You can also access past webinars and search for the topics most important to you.