Exploring Flexibilities in Protein Nutrition for a Sustainable Dairy Industry - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G1vV6Y8t-3s

Transcript:
(00:08) Hello everyone and welcome to the real science exchange. The podcast where leading scientists and industry professionals meet over a few drinks to discuss the latest ideas and trends in animal nutrition. Hi, I'm Scott Serell, going to be your host here tonight at the Real Sense Exchange. And tonight we're taking a deeper dive into a past webinar topic with Dr.
(00:27) Kelly Nichols from the University of California, Davis, and we're going to discuss her past webinar titled Exploring Flexibilities in Protein Nutrition for a Sustainable Dairy Industry. But before we uh get started into that, I'd like to uh welcome back our our featured guest, Dr. Kelly Nichols. Uh this is your second time here to Pub, so welcome back. I appreciate you coming by again.
(00:50) >> Thank you, Scott. >> Kelly, before we get started, can you just kind of give us a little bit of background about yourself? just tell us a little bit about uh who Dr. Kelly Nichols is. >> Yeah, sure. Um, so I'm originally from Canada. I did the start of my training at the University of G in Ontario. That's where I did my bachelor's and my masters up there with Dr. John K.
(01:17) um I had the kind of unique opportunity during my masters to start working with um do part of my project with industry so the company TR nutrition. So my project up there already kind of started me on this path of integrating um academic really fundamental research with with industry R&D and when I finished my masters wanted to move on to a PhD and sort of through that industry network I got the opportunity to move to the Netherlands to do my PhD at Bathaninga University.
(01:52) So I spent four years over there with Yandexra and Andre Banick in the animal nutrition group at Bathaning University. Um which of course was a big change in a lot of ways. But I really it was I think super important to have an exposure to dairy nutrition research in a different country with completely different set of challenges and start to link that together thinking about a future trajectory.
(02:21) So uh when I finished me a PhD I did a posttock of Aaninga joined actually when the postto project was finished joined TR nutrition R&D in their ruminant research team. So that's what I was doing for the last five years before I moved here to California to UC Davis. So I spent five years in the ruminant R&D team over there basically running um a research line on nitrogen efficiency in ruminants.
(02:52) So mostly focus on dairy starting to think a little bit as well about about beef cattle at that time. And then last year in March 2024 I joined the faculty here at UC Davis in the department of animal studies. And that's where I've been now for a year and a bit and sometimes feels like it's been like five years and sometimes it feels like it's been five minutes since I've been here.
(03:17) So um yeah, and my program here I've been fortunate to be able to focus really since my masters on um similar topics. So uh protein nutrition and dairy cattle being kind of the overall overarching theme with a focus on memory gland amino acid metabolism bringing in a lot of interaction with energy source and how that shifts protein efficiency with a little bit more focus recently on starting to put the rin into that equation.
(03:49) So, I've spent a lot of time thinking about post-absorptive metabolism. But over the last five, six years or so, finally started to acknowledge that room and nitrogen metabolism is also extremely important to that equation. So, starting to bring that into my program um here at UC Davis as well. >> Very well, that's quite a resume.
(04:08) Uh I'm kind of curious. You went uh from industry back into academia. Usually, it goes the other way. What went into that decision? Yeah. So, um it's a very common question that I get. The uh the working for TR nutrition in their R&D was such an incredible job really. I mean it was in some ways of all the worlds.
(04:33) Uh if you want to we were able we and this team still does I work still very closely with them fundamental research the same caliber as what's being done at top tier academic institutions. So the researchers there are some of the best that I've worked with. They're able to do really cool stuff, great facilities. I really like also the interaction with students and teaching.
(04:59) Um always say academia is a bit more entrepreneurial. So here I'm kind of running my own show, running my own business so to say. And that is of course a difference from being an industry where you I had a lot of autonomy ran my own research program essentially there at the end of the day you're part of a much larger organization that is making decisions whereas academic side you're a bit more your own boss in that sense and just you're kind of running your own show.
(05:32) So that appealed to me. I always knew if the right opportunity at a at a university that I had some felt some pull to to go and spend my time there if that came up then I might pursue it knowing that I had a really great gig of course working working for travel but that's what happened when the the opportunity UC Davis came up.
(05:54) >> Awesome. So I'm looking forward the conversation tonight. Uh I see you brought a guest with us. Uh can you introduce your guest and and tell us uh how'd you come about deciding to to bring her to the pub with you tonight? >> Yeah. So welcome Susanna. Susanna is a assistant professor at Rohus University in Denmark.
(06:14) That is that's the official title, assistant professor there, right Susanna? Yes. Okay. I know it's a bit different in Europe the titles. >> Yeah. So I picked Susanna because her and I we've known each other now for several years mostly through the alignment of our research focus. So she's been active in the protein nutrition space, the amino acid space um for many years and I thought she would be the perfect one to invite today given that she recently started her position at our host.
(06:50) So she's also kind of early stage faculty position starting her research program with all this expertise in protein nutrition, protein metabolism and I thought it would be a great platform for us both to be able to kind of talk about our new ideas going forward and also complimentary from that perspective. >> Excellent. So Susanna, welcome.
(07:14) Um, [clears throat] I must say I've got I've got a I've got a lot of uh favorites here at the Real Science Exchange, but you're one of them. Uh, this is this is not the first time you've been here. Uh, I think the first time we met um you were actually a uh a Nitney Lion as I recall. Is that correct? >> Yes.
(07:36) So, I did do my PhD at Penn State VR. >> Yes. There you go. [laughter] uh and from 2017 to 2021 and I I had just graduated I think um from my PhD when we first met at ABSA and and we talked about histadine together. >> Excellent. Well, tell us a little bit about what what you're doing now, what you've done since you left uh graduated from Penn State.
(08:03) Yeah. So since I graduated Penn State, I stayed a little bit for one year posttock at University of Helsinki in Finland where I am originally from. Um, and that's where I kind of shifted a little bit more toward overall protein nitrogen efficiency work with legumes, uh, clover, silage, cheese, faban as a protein feed.
(08:28) And then I had a little stay in ETH at um in Switzerland, ETH Zurich uh where I stayed a little over not quite two years as a postto and senior assistant as they call it there leading that and there I had a more diverse profile of different ruminate dairy nutrition research that we did and and I led and then um and then now I got this position here at Orhus Universities.
(08:57) this since January this year. So, it hasn't been too long yet. Um but I luckily got involved right away the first day I got here in a big uh five-year project that is minister funded here uh in Denmark related to nitrogen efficiency and we are it's a multi-disiplinary project where we are looking kind of the lifetime uh nitrogen efficiency and utilization and kind of the budget of the of the whole dairy life uh dairy cow life cycle and of course for me I'm focusing more on the lactating how we are doing different types of um nutrition experiments
(09:34) looking at full lactation even extended lactation with this early lactation protein boost that's also very new to me and I'm excited to be involved in in that um and leading that project and then the other one we are looking more and maybe we can talk about it more as we get into the discussion but we are looking into this um rin available nitrogen versus metabizable protein um and and feeding the cows different levels and trying to find what would be optimal in terms of nitrogen efficiency and production and how we can and it
(10:08) fits really well. I was excited to get this invitation from uh from Kelly to to talk about it because that's kind of what I've been thinking thinking about since for a long time but especially since January and and uh having uh different new ideas and perspectives also myself into this nitrogen efficiency uh world after working a lot with individual amino acids and specifically histadine and Roman protected amino acids and now I'm kind of zooming out a little bit and thinking also about the big picture.
(10:40) >> Excellent. Well, looking forward to the conversation tonight and to hearing a little bit more about your your new ideas. New research is changing everything we thought we knew about choline's impact on the cow and her calf. And top scientists have a lot to say about it. They are presenting new research that supports choline as a required nutrient to optimize milk production.
(11:11) Choline as a required nutrient to support a healthy transition, choline as a required nutrient to improve calf health and growth, and choline as a required nutrient to increase colostrum quantity. This new research is solidifying choline's role as a required nutrient for essentially every cow, regardless of health status, milk production level, or body condition score.
(11:36) Learn more about the science that is changing the game and the choline source that is making it happen. Reassure precision release choline from Balm. Visit balchm.com/scientists to learn more. I need to introduce my co-host, Dr. Laura Nihus. Laura, welcome back to the Real Science Exchange. Thank you for joining me here here tonight. Uh, >> thanks, Scott.
(12:06) >> Uh, Kelly, uh, the presentation you gave was called Exploring Flexibilities and protein nutrition for a sustainable dairy industry. Before we kind of dig into that, can we maybe level set and talk a little bit about why what role does protein nutrition play in in uh sustainability? Let's talk a little bit about that.
(12:27) >> So from my perspective, I'm I'm heavily biased of course given this is what I've thought about for the last 10 years. Um I think protein nutrition plays an extremely important role in our sustainability discussions in I would say all livestock but in ruminants in particular on the positive side we often talk about how they are net protein producers right so they take nonp protein richch ingredients or even yeah ingredients that have very very little protein in them especially ones that of course humans can't consume and other livestock
(13:02) species als also wouldn't be able to make very good use of them and then they turn them into their own protein. So microbial protein that is the major uh digestible amino acid source for our ruminants and then with that they make meat and milk protein. So that's the kind of positive side of the story being that they produce protein.
(13:24) And then of course there is the more negative side of that equation being that ruminants get labeled as very being relatively nitrogen or protein inefficient. So while they have the ability to really upcycle resources and kind of create their own protein, there are aspects along that digestive and metabolic process that are not super efficient in terms of the nitrogen that comes off of that and then ultimately gets excreted.
(13:54) predominantly in urine and then of course some in feces as [clears throat] well. And then that's contributing to manure nitrogen which has some negative environmental impacts like ammonia release nitrous oxide um nitrogen leeching into the ground and the negative impacts of that on for example water quality nitrate contamination in drinking water these types of things.
(14:18) So, it's extremely important to think about how we make decisions around what constitutes the protein that goes into these animals and understanding the implications on how we can maybe manipulate how much is going into a productive product like meter milk versus how much is going to be excreted and limiting the excesses of that as much as possible.
(14:43) >> All right, so we kind of established that nitrogen's kind of it's a pollutant, right? um where would you say um is is it a problem everywhere or is there maybe any geographic uh concentrations where it's more of a problem than others? And I'm and I'm kind of Susanna kind of looking at you like Europe I know nitrogen is is a big deal and has been for a very very long time.
(15:09) Just kind of curious is is it more of a problem in Europe or they just a little more sensitive to it? Yeah, I think um it's interesting to think about it and I I think Kelly kind of introduced her her lecture also well with this very and I I guess it has been a big focus for a long time in Europe, but there is kind of in the recent years being a renewed spotlight on on the nitrogen especially in in um in countries I think especially talking about the Netherlands for example where the the the how do you say the the agriculture is a huge part of the the
(15:48) system and and the land use there and it's a very intensive system in a on a small area of land and it's a re a little bit similar here in Denmark where agriculture is a huge uh land user here and in a in a small area of land um and here as well and this is partly why I came here in Denmark because um and here as well that the focus on nitrogen and how we can limit the the the pollution and and reduce the pollution excretion to water bodies for example and and reduce the pollution from nitrogen from agriculture especially um has has become
(16:26) uh more and more in into the focus. Um, methane has been uh for many years now the the very big focus in regards to to emissions and sustainability. And I think nitrogen has kind of been a little bit more in the the shadow of the methane um field and and research. Um but I think uh here I what I've been hearing so far is that nitrogen has become more and more also of the focus and how we can and limit uh limit that pollution also and still maintain production.
(17:04) That's always important to keep in mind. >> And even across a big country, of course, like you you hit the nail on the head there, Suzanne. In Europe, it's this countries that have really intensive animal production on a relatively small uh land mass. But if you look at a massive country like the United States or like Canada, of course, we have a lot of land mass.
(17:25) But then in the US, what we see, and I showed it in um the first couple slides of my presentation, those figures where they've they're starting to point out areas of um sort of threat to, for example, nitrate pollution in water exceeding uh legal thresholds. You can map that pretty closely to the big dairy producing regions of the country.
(17:49) So you know through the central valley in California um you know in Wisconsin Midwest areas where we have a lot of cows and they are concentrated in a small area. California is a massive state but the dairy cows are very concentrated in that central valley. So you in a sense kind of produce the same outcome as what for example the country of the Netherlands has been struggling with where you've got a lot of dairy cows on a small piece of land being an entire country.
(18:17) In this case, we've got it just regionally. So, I think you see the same thing happening in in in larger countries as well. Focus. >> Yeah. Just to say being in having been to Penn State and studying under Dr. Kristoff's lab and and supervision and he has been working with nitrogen and amino acids for a long time as well and and Pennsylvania is also a big dairy state and they're also being in the northeast with large also populations and a lot of agricultural lands and important water water bodies there as well. Um and I I know in his talks he
(18:57) has been talking as well about these nitrogen pollutions in in water bodies and the importance also also in the US context as Kelly was saying. >> I was just going to ask I was just as we're talking a little bit about nitrogen excretion especially urinary nitrogen. Is there a way that we can easily measure this in the field similar to how we do like pH strips for urine pH? Is there a urinary nitrogen type strip that we can use or is that not really a reliable measure just because that nitrogen component might be um not
(19:31) the easiest to measure just on a in a field trial? >> Yeah, I think the challenge with nitrogen is how volatile it is. What's coming out of in urine in particular and of course the bigger concern is when it comes in contact with organic matter. So um particularly anything that's going to produce the enzyme urase and that's where you start to get that initial breakdown of the ura that's in the urine um into ammonia and then it kind of cascades from there.
(20:05) The challenge with nitrogen in general is that it transforms in its environment. So it's also in some ways you could say more difficult to measure or capture than something like methane which we know what it is. You can trace it, you can track it, you can capture it. Whereas nitrogen is um a bit more nebulous in that way.
(20:29) So I think something like a urine strip in theory that it's an interesting idea p practically I'm not sure how that would work on really really large dairies um but certainly the idea of barkers or things that farms can very easily measured to start to get an idea of where they stand on a nitrogen efficiency standpoint especially if they're making changes in their diet or you know just the normal changes in diet composition that happen over the course of a year on a dairy bringing some awareness to what implication that might be having on the
(21:09) environmental impact of nitrogen. Of course dairies are always really focused on dietary changes from the economic perspective. So what are you doing with your protein composition to have that pencil out well based on your milk check? But um there I think there will be more focus also on potential penalties from the excretion side of things which will of course have a financial impact as well.
(21:35) So I think there will be continued emphasis on ways that teams can have a better idea of what's going on there. I know around in this city in California, um there's a pretty significant body of research that's ongoing to look at just in general the emissions that are coming off of manure lagoons and other ways of managing manure based on our dairy system here to um better manage emissions in general.
(22:09) So whether those are nitrogenous emissions or carbon emissions. So that's something that that is growing here in California and I do expect that that will continue across across the US as well. >> Kind of going to take a real quick left turn here, but uh um we hear a lot about um you know nitrogen excretion relative to dairy cattle and other livestock.
(22:31) How does how does livestock compare to human? Um, does anybody know are are is it is it worse than than the the emissions from from the human population? There's far more of us than there are dairy cattle. >> Yeah, I think um I don't know the numbers of photonic women to human. I suspect we would if you looked at it, you would start to have a similar um picture almost to what we get into with carbon related emissions where Yeah.
(23:03) The construction industries, cars, human related activity, let's just call it, also releases quite a bit of nitrous oxide. For example, there are nitrogen emissions associated with that. If you look at agriculture, probably the proportion of emissions from that it it ends up being intense based on on how kind of it exists.
(23:33) Again, a problem so to say with nitrogen would be it trickles through the chain. So manure from dairy cattle depending on what's being managed on farm its own point source emission but then if that manure is going onto fields to fertilize crops and is excess of the nitrogen balance there as well it has that impact. That's where you get into leeching um in water tables that might not be directly associated with the dairy but it's manure from those cows.
(24:05) So it kind of there's a a larger chain there that encompasses all of agriculture when you talked about nitrogen. So how that would pencil out compared to non-aggricultural related industry um I don't know exactly but it's definitely as with the me conversation it's not only livestock that are producing our greenhouse nitrogen related greenhouse gas emissions or or um environmental pollutants.
(24:33) That's for sure. >> Yeah, for sure. U Kelly, we've had a lot of uh people come on the Real Science Exchange talking about different aspects of protein nutrition, amino acid nutrition, but I think this is the first time we've talked about uh flex uh flexibility uh uh of efficiency. And so talk to me about that.
(24:56) What what does that mean and why is it important? >> Yeah. Uh I have used this term flexibility probably since when I was putting together my PhD work. Um you know you you take all these findings that you that you've observed over a few years and you try to make this overall picture of it. And the word that kept coming up for me there is how flexible ruminant metabolism is in terms of their ability to use different ingredients and produce the same metabolites or even different metabolites that they can use for the same purposes.
(25:37) And I think and I've continued to use that because I think it's a good descriptor of the opportunities and challenges that we saw in marine nutrition. also think it kind of hearkens to the fact that we've been working in this space for years and years and years and like you say so many people have come on this podcast who I respect heavily and have been doing this for so much longer than I have and we still have ongoing questions and I think a lot of the reason for that is we we see different responses when we feed
(26:11) different things in different groups of animals based on lactation stage age based on management and that's all because of this metabolic flexibility that exists. So that's why I continue to use that term and I think as my research evolves I just see it again and again um as not an explainer and it's not it's not the reason why there's all these it makes it kind of difficult to give just black and white answers to things because there is always this flexibility and I think that's it's it's a cool opportunity that we have when we we feed
(26:48) dairy cattle and other ruminants. Yeah, because I really love also this concept of flexibility and it really also came during my my PhD work and actually reading Kelly's PhD work that she just published a couple of years before I I graduated and I was writing my dissertation and and my literature review and and I and I really like this idea.
(27:14) It's like you said it it makes things very complicated and not black and white but I think it's it there is a lot of potential there also to to and what's for me fascinates me about ruminance and dairy cows with the complexity of the rin and we maybe will go into the rin later later in this podcast but um but also the flexibility of the memory plan and what what what it can do with with especially amino acids and I think it's an important concept to think about and now that I've been starting a study with with a full lactation study with early lactation
(27:48) cows and looking into some data from orus what from Moen Larsson as well um where they have been supplementing this casein or or amino acids post ruminal infusions and what they can see with in the in the milk production with these infusions and now we are doing it with the protein concentrate feed and we really see a pump in the milk production in the first um month or two months of of lactation with this and and and I think there is something to do with this flexibility that Kelly also talks about.
(28:22) [snorts] >> Yeah. Why don't you expound on that uh Susanna because Dr. Larson's uh research? It wasn't just a bump in milk production. I mean it was pretty massive. So >> why don't you quantify that and then then I'm curious. did did that did that trajectory uh uh last over the entire lactation of those animals? So that's one thing that they they haven't really done uh to follow the cows and look at the the carryover effect over more than I think that study was maybe well I don't remember on top of my head but maybe one month or 40 50
(28:58) days something like this >> um and and in that study they did see a a carryover across that study period which was not too long into the midlactation um and there really is a lack of research with um with these infusions or with real diets so to say to to have this protein boost in the early lactation.
(29:24) Um and that's kind of what we are trying to replicate now with our on co ongoing study is to to how we can translate that very classic paper. We I know Kelly also has has been inspired by by Dr. Larson study and I a lot of people in in our field doing amino acid work u because it's really remarkable what uh what the cows were able to do with this amino acid supply um and what we are now people have done for example the Ohio state they have done some studies there with uh different different ways of of supplementing metabizable protein in in this early you
(30:04) know first couple of weeks or so of lactation. Um and and there has been some benefit. I think Kelly also presented some of these uh studies in her lecture. Um there has been some benefits seen but not really this carryover effect that um that uh we want to see also because um that would be really beneficial for the the from the nitrogen efficiency standpoint and and with TMR feeding it doesn't seem to work so well for some reason to to provide extra metabolizable protein from a TMR.
(30:42) Um that's some data that's coming out uh soon hopefully from from uh our group here at Orhorse University. But now what we have been testing and this is very pre preliminary so I don't want to promise too much but um but with this separate concentrate feed um given in um on on top of the PMR that we are feeding to the cows somehow with this separate concentrate feed we we are seeing a similar response in the milk killed as as as they have seen with with the infusions.
(31:17) So that's really interesting and maybe also comes back to this flexibility that if we provide a a boo a targeted boost in a specific may we I have to look into the data when the cows are eating this concentrate they likely will eat it in batches maybe two two uh batches of a few kilograms in a certain time of the day and maybe there is a pull from the memory gland uh for for these amino acids to to direct those uh toward this increased milk production.
(31:48) But there's a lot we don't know yet and and there's a lot to to think about in terms of this flexibility and and what happens in the memory gland when we have this uh amino acid uh extra amino acid supply. >> Well, you're right. Uh there's a lot we don't know yet, but I am going to ask Dr. Nichols to speculate. Right. Uh during your presentation, you had three areas of focus.
(32:12) And so which of maybe you want to outline those first, but which of those three areas would you speculate is having the impact on uh the results that uh Susanna's seen? >> Yeah. So just to overview those three areas that I touched on. So I chose to highlight flexibility in three kind of buckets. So one being the impact of energy source and how it interacts with nitrogen efficiency.
(32:39) The second one was reconsidering how we think about room and nitrogen balance and then the third one was mammorary gland amino acid metabolism in general. So this idea of providing a protein boost and I think it's super interesting starting to trans try how can we translate this pretty substantial body of infusion work that has been done postal infusion or jugular infusion work with amino acid profanals over the years where we see responses that are very impressive.
(33:16) if you could reproduce that in practice would be game changers essentially from a protein efficiency standpoint. Uh how do we start to design studies and get better at estimating digestible amino acid supply to be able to replicate so to say what we're seeing with those infusion studies which is a huge challenge.
(33:41) So what Susanna is describing in in a study where you would provide through the concentrate protein boost, let's assume it's formulated to target a digestible amino acid supply that the animals really require. I would say that you're we are probably looking at that memory gland is able to the efficiency the marginal efficiency of use basically of the protein supply in that supplement.
(34:12) So for every extra unit of concentrate that that animal consumes, how efficiently is that being translated into milk protein? And I would suspect assuming that concentrate is bringing quite a bit of our UP. So room undergradable protein it that's a that's a memory gland response I would think in terms of their affinity for the amino acids that are being absorbed out of out of that boost from the concentrate.
(34:39) how that differs from increasing protein content through estimated metabolizable protein supply in a TMR system. I think that's super interesting to think about and that is such a good example of the capacity for flexibility in ruminants when they're consuming a TMR. So everything at once, every bite that they consume in theory should be homogeneous versus they can have some kind of like metabolic choice so to say in consuming a PMR.
(35:18) So you have they're consuming energy and protein from a more heavily forage base maybe with a little bit of concentrate and then they also have the opportunity to go and consume concentrate which is going to be that heavy hit of protein and energy. And then you can look at the temporal dynamics of that which hasn't really been well characterized metabolically.
(35:38) There's been kind of a boost in publications looking at crude protein oscillation which might get close to that. And if you look at some there's some studies with more extensively managed ruminance where they provide protein supplementation even as as infrequent as once a week and the efficiency with which they use that nitrogen can be pretty impressive.
(36:00) that those are pretty fundamentally different management systems. But I think the temporal dynamics that is an area that is very underexplored particularly in lactating cows with in terms of memory metabolism that is super interesting. >> So the PMR is used I I relate that to being used a lot in Europe and a TMR here in the states.
(36:22) Do you think that based on some of this information, it might make sense from a practical perspective for everybody to maybe take a look at moving to a PMR concept as opposed to the TMR idea? >> Yeah, Suzanne and I chatted earlier this week and we were talking about that exact thing. um the idea that concentrate feeders, so out of parlor concentrate feeders, could that be a thing? Um on US dairy farms, you know, thinking about massive herds that I see in California, how could they move to something like that? Don't think it's a crazy idea really. If
(37:00) it if it allows for for us to get closer to this idea of precision protein nutrition, individual animal requirements or rather the individual potential for response of individual animals or groups of animals um may be the way going forward. And even if you think about the the the shift to robotic milking already provides an opportunity, the the capacity for those robots to provide different concentrates is already a potential opportunity.
(37:37) Um there's more and more research every year coming out about how to feed herds in how to feed herds on an automatic milking system program. If you think about that, it's somewhat similar. So that's that's already a way that we can start to kind of combine those concepts. >> But yeah, it could be it that's the we're starting to see some of these really beneficial impacts could be.
(38:06) >> Yeah. Interesting. >> Yeah. And it's it's very interesting because I I so I did my basic training, my bachelor's and my master's degree in Sweden. So that's kind of my basis. And then I went to the US and all my training there was PMR based and no one ever talked about having a PMR and or very little talk about that.
(38:26) And then then I went to to Finland and Switzerland where it's very common to have a robotic milking and or this um you know concentrate automat in automatic concentrate stations within the freestyle system or such and especially in Switzerland where they have a lot of grazing plows and such they kind of complement those um and supplement with with some extra concentrate and then now in in Denmark it's actually has people have moved more toward for TMR feeding.
(38:57) And here is also a long tradition of of TMR feeding. And now we are thinking talking about it with this separate concentrate that maybe they have to start bringing back the the these concentrate stations because we we have this ability then to to have individualized um feeding and and also then feed the cows based on the lactation curve based on the stage of lactation and having that adjustment in the feeding throughout the lactation which can be very beneficial in terms of you know economics on the farm as well.
(39:26) efficiency of of feed utilization and and then really getting the potential out of all the cows within the herd and not just you know feeding for the top cows or something then maybe maybe we are not really pulling out all the potential we have have in the herd if we are kind of uniformly feeding everyone the same >> that's that is is very interesting especially thinking about some of the larger herds out in California that I wonder if just because they already have so many different rations.
(39:59) You know, a lot of those herds, if they're over 2,000 cows, you're usually going to have more than one ration. And so I see for those herds, especially when you have an early lactation in a mid and a late, and then maybe you have another one that's for fat cows, and then you have far off and close up, then you kind of got your bases covered.
(40:17) But those smaller herds where you only have one TMR system and then um I run into it all the time of trying to almost do a pack essentially. So we'll have like an early lactation pack that we hand add in to that load specifically just so that they can get a little boost of those nutrients um in the early lactation ration too.
(40:39) And so that's that's kind of a similar concept uh that in those smaller herds it might be might be feasible to do it that way sometimes. But um overall I was going to say I uh sorry ahead of time to Scott because I have so many questions but I did my background um very similar to you Susanna.
(41:01) I uh actually graduated my PhD in 2021 and I was doing um looking at lysine during transition period. So >> I was at University of Illinois looking at rin protective lysine. So I have a lot of uh similar training. And then when I came out of school, my first job was looking at a bypass protein source that was actually cornbased.
(41:21) So looking a lot at um a heavy supply of leucine, not really a good supply of lysine. And so um because of that, I was looking at a lot of rations. And that led me to getting into that metabolic flexibility space of trying to look at, okay, why does this cornbased bypass protein perform so well in some herds when lysine is still low, for instance, and we have a lot of leucine? And um so that kind of led me to look at, okay, maybe this um limiting amino acid theory doesn't always work for every system in the same way. So the mammary gland might
(42:00) have a slightly different way of utilizing amino acids than the cow as a whole. So I don't if either of you want to comment on the fact that um that limiting amino acid theory doesn't really mesh with the met metabolic flexibility and both of those ideas. Is there a way that we're kind of combining them now in a sense that you know of course the most efficient cow will supply all amino acids at exactly what she needs but that's not realistic in um industry today.
(42:33) So kind of how does that limiting amino acid theory mesh with the metabolic flexibility? >> Yeah, that's such a great point. Um, for me it falls right in with where I had the same thought process as you through my training over the years and and I think as an industry overall we've we have very much come to this realization and it's fairly well proven at this point that the traditional concept of the limiting amino acid being one specific amino acid all the time doesn't hold for milk protein synthesis.
(43:07) That said, there will always be something that limits the system. That's just biology. But because of that flexibility of the memorary gland, it's not always lysine. It's not always methionine. It's not always histadine. It's commonly those based on the ingredients that we typically feed and the a um requirements for milk protein synthesis.
(43:35) But indeed, you have great examples like that corn bypass product you were describing where you're thinking on paper we should see this response, but we actually see a much um we're pleasantly surprised by the response that we see. [laughter] And lysine to me is a really interesting one because when we look at really traditional memory metabolism it it tends to fall under a category of amino acids that actually are taken up in excess of what goes out in milk.
(44:05) So it is one of those flexible ones but that's in the same group as for example arginine or thrienine or the branch chain amino acids. So then you can look a little bit deeper at the metabolic pathways there and see okay what's contributing nitrogen and carbon to um the other metabolites that those amino acids are being used for whether that's non-essential amino acids whether that's fatty acids or or just simply energy generation um within the scope of a certain sort of supply to the memorary gland within that
(44:44) What are the flexibilities within those groups? So, if there's a lot of leucine coming from that corn product, then yeah, lysine, you could pump them with as much room of protected lysine as you want and you're not going to see an improvement in efficiency because they they perhaps the way the mammary gland is seeing it at kind of a cellular level, that's just not needed.
(45:08) There's carbon nitrogen is already there. And you can think about the transporters into the memory gland and if there's competition that way. There's a lot of ways that flexibility can kind of manifest animal tissue cellular level. So yeah, it it falls well in line with that everything you said in terms of the limiting minoxid competing kind of with this flexibility and how that explains why that doesn't really work in the traditional sense for memory metabolism.
(45:38) >> Yeah. And one one thing that I found really interesting is that of course I studied lysine for my PhD and we saw great responses with a large amount of rubin protected lysine during transition period especially um in that early lactation milk yield. And then in the field I feel like I see a lot more rin protected methane than rin protected lysine.
(46:02) And um just recently we've I've looked at a few uh field studies where we're seeing a really nice response to rin protected lysine in milk fat. And it's interesting to me because then I was like, well, that doesn't necessarily make sense with kind of what I've looked at before with metabolic flexibility and then um some of the recent research, which is looking at lysine then directly impacting milk fat um through gene expression and looking at it like directly impacting DGAP for example.
(46:32) um that then is really making every all the wheels turn in my mind thinking about the fact that okay it's not just supplying the adequate amount of amino acids but sometimes if you supply more you then get almost this direct biological response that um like what you would have with say providing more energy or something along those lines.
(46:54) So, I don't know if you've seen any of that either, but then that really blows the limiting amino acid theory out of the water because supplying more continues to have a response. >> Yeah, there's a fairly clear relationship between amino acid supply and also fat response. We see that a lot.
(47:13) So a lot of the and I don't know Susanna the room the more individual amino acid supplementation with the rumin protected products that you've done and if it's similar but certainly in the infusion work that that I've done and others over the years um it's not always highlighted in for example the discussion or the results in the paper but if you go back and look at it there's you most more often than not I would say there is also a fat response when we're infusing um essential amino acids or even some of the groups.
(47:43) So it yeah, there's a link there for sure that's just not always highlighted. I think you're starting to hear more discussion about it now, the importance of amino acid balancing, fatty acid balancing, the flexibility within that as well. So yeah, >> it's just getting more and more complicated, but um uh which is fun for us when we we do research.
(48:10) Um I think for histadine what we have seen in some cases it seems to actually de decrease milk fat. uh but we I don't know if there is a clear that I know of a clear mechanism behind that or if it's a dilution effect when we we see a response in milk yield as well but but seems to be that with histadine at least it's it's the opposite effect but yeah don't know the mechanism or if there is any anything out there showing a clear you know pathway to it or something yeah >> yeah I think we've had similar experience with histadine I don't know
(48:44) on the milk fat side of things But definitely it provides that yield response. So >> could certainly be just that dilution. But to further complicate things and um >> Kelly a question that I was dying to ask during your webinar. So I was very happy that I got the opportunity to come on this podcast.
(49:04) But um you talked a lot about uh sources of energy. So whether that's gluccogenic or lipogenic and kind of how those might behave differently um when we're talking about nitrogen efficiency and so when then I'm thinking okay if we're providing say especially when we're looking at like hyleic soybeans so we're getting now a lot of energy from fat in some of these rations but when we are balancing for amino acids on an energy basis do you think we need to be looking at amine derived from gluccogenic sources and and then me derived from lipogenic sources and
(49:40) consider those behaving somewhat differently or >> Yeah, that's where I'm kind of getting at with this. I think right now we don't have enough good data characterizing lipogenic diets and the implication on amino acid metabolism, whole body nitrogen partitioning. There's a lot of work on of course feeding or like you say these highle soybeans that are becoming um a big thing right now.
(50:10) um supplementation is growing, growing, growing. Some really great studies missing that nitrogen component, missing that mamary gland amino acid component. >> But yes, based on the work that I've done and a few others, um I would say it's compelling to consider whether your Emmy is coming more from a lipogenic source.
(50:37) I mean at at the end of the day that measurement is is is metabizable energy. It's more what's happening in the in the system that could be influencing amino acid partitioning nitrogen metabolism. So the energy might be the energy from kind of an energy standpoint if that makes sense. Um it's what's going on in response to that source.
(51:01) So, we know with more of a gluccogenic diet, like there's more of a a kind of whole system response that interacts with where amino acids are going in nitrogen efficiency. On the fat side, what I've seen is more related to a low protein diet. You we did see some potential improvements in nitrogen efficiency when you supplement.
(51:25) I would say that that's not super well characterized yet. The other thing about energy, and this is where a little bit the rumin side comes in too, how you supplement fat versus more of a gluccogenic source usually is quite different in terms of what the composition of that ration is going to look like and how you're replacing other ingredients, right? So like thinking of a more starchrich diet versus a more fiber richch diet or if you're adding in rumin or fats >> what's then the impact on rin nitrogen balance if you're pulling fermentable
(52:04) energy out of there to supplement more for example or rumin and earth fats. So there you might be um influencing nitrogen efficiency at the whole body level in a way that to provide more lipogenic energy but I just don't think it's super well characterized. We have some work that will be presented by my sap in Germany in a couple weeks now um a collaboration that I have with Rachel Jet at Love where we did do that.
(52:38) So they were um feeding pulminic acid and we did measure nitrogen balance. So it was yeah pulmitic acid and um rin degradable protein. So it's a factorial design looking at protein and energy from fat basic. There were some interesting results that kind of get at that idea. what are we taking out to add in energy from fat versus energy from a more glucagenic source and how is that influencing nitrogen efficiency? So, I think there could be something to that in the future if we start to zero in on that more um with some more research. Uh Susanna, you
(53:19) teased us in the very beginning uh with with some new ideas you wanted to talk about. So, I want to make sure that we leave uh plenty of time to do that if we've not already covered some of those. you you want to share some of your ideas and thoughts? >> Well, one one thing we we we like um Kelly mentioned, we we chatted a little bit earlier this week and and I I we have a lot of interesting ideas that align really well as well.
(53:46) So, I I I think Kelly also will have a lot to to share of of what's coming with in her lab. Um but I I for me this what we touched on a little bit. I've been interested in looking into this what um what Kelly has already done and is doing uh with this nen energy or amino acid energy kind of interactions and um and I also want to we have done some we just published some work uh from my time at Penn State looking into this amino acid what amino acids do in the rin for in terms of microbial protein synthesis that's also very little studied area. Um
(54:26) I think there is a lot to explore there as well is what type of nitrogen we are supplying in the room and then for the room and microbes. That's a whole maybe a Pandora's box that I I'm opening if I ever go there. Um, but I think and and then what Kelly kind of talked about a little bit in the beginning is that we always are often approached the nitrogen topic in terms of all the negative things and low efficiency and emissions and pollution and everything.
(54:57) And I think it's important to also emphasize how amazing the ruminants are and what they can do and and that's a lot to do with the rin and with the memory plant in in lacting cows and and how we can think about and better characterize and also measure the microbial protein and how we can maximize that side of things and supply the cow with with with microbial protein and understanding that and and measuring that better.
(55:25) So we can also include it in the we have it in the models in our feed evaluation systems but I think a lot of them are not good at predicting that and what what's the effect of diet on on microal protein synthesis. Um and then because also it's very difficult to measure and estimate uh what's coming out of the rin.
(55:46) Um so that's something I I think I want to explore a little bit more and think about how we can do that and how we can man manipulate it and then incorporating uh it it into the feed evaluation systems also to to be able to utilize the great and amazing side of of ruminance. Um and and so that's one big part.
(56:10) And now that we are uh I'm getting into this full lactation studies and then early lactation supply of protein, I think there is still a lot to do. Um we talked about a little bit this uh transition cow lysine supply. For example, there has been a lot of work with methionine and all these infusion studies with with casein for example. uh but then how we can translate it translate these results into uh into real life actual diets that can be fed on farms.
(56:41) Um and then the impact of how we can manipulate maybe have this phase feeding concept of of having um um you know this boost maybe in early lactation and then being able to really lower the the protein supply in in later lactation and and what impacts that could have both production wise and then uh and not just efficiency wise.
(57:02) So those are some some things uh I I've been thinking about. >> Interesting. Kelly, any followup to that? >> Well, I mean, I could reiterate it completely. I'm interested in all the same stuff. I think maybe just to underscore for me, um, coming to California, looking at what we feed here, I mean, this was a it was a shift in the system.
(57:29) One number of times we Yeah. coming from Southern Ontario herds going to Dutch herds and now California, massive herds also. But from a nutrition standpoint, how not only how to manage those large groups of animals, but the ingredients that we have available here, this wide variety of byproducts where those are not well characterized in our formulation systems whatsoever.
(57:56) So, for me, that's really, you know, you want to talk about metabolic flexibility, what are they doing with citrus pulp, what are they doing with almond hulls, um or any other, you know, carrot waste, all this stuff that you see, um when you drive around. So that got me thinking again about the importance of pushing forward our ability to estimate a digestible amino acid profile because that's kind of what so much of this hinges on that link between the infusion work that we've done the responses that we see there filling that gap also then with what we
(58:33) can do with rin protected products that exist. So, um, getting better at characterizing what's actually available to be absorbed, um, with new techniques that we might have available that we didn't have years and years ago where traditional methods when those were being developed. Like Susanna said, it's it's it's a challenge. We got here for a reason.
(58:56) There's a reason why we don't have the capability to do that with such precision, but maybe going forward we can improve in that in that space. Um yeah, and and like uh like Susanna said, just continuing to try to think about individual animal response and and maybe moving away whether it's individual animal or pen level, thinking about rather than the requirements that we're targeting, a better way on farm to look at the response that you see to a diet change because that's ultimately what nutritionist consultants That's
(59:34) what they're doing, right? They're adjusting based on they might have a starting point based on a model, but then they're looking at what's really happening and they're making adjustments accordingly. So, is there a way to just enhance that, get better at it? Um, and of systems that work more in that way, whether that is the level of the individual animal with concentrate feeders where you have more of that point source nutrition or on a pen level.
(1:00:07) um looking at responses to energy source protein supply and how that can be manipulated versus predicted requirements and sort of feeding to that. That's something I think for the future that will only be made easier by understanding um what's actually coming out of the rim then. >> But before we uh we close out, I'd like to are there any big topics that we've uh left uncovered that that you think we need to address in this podcast? Um, and if it's really big, we can always come back and do another podcast because this has been this has been uh very
(1:00:37) interesting. >> I might just shout out sort of that skin bucket that I talked about in terms of metabolic flexibility in my presentation being room nitrogen balance. Um, we've talked a lot about amino acids and sort of postabsorptive memory [clears throat] metabolism. Susanna mentioned interest in rin microbial protein.
(1:00:58) A big piece of that puzzle that certainly here is planning on working on in the future is getting a understanding of the contribution of indogenous nitrogen recycled ura to that room and nitrogen balance. There's been a lot of work in that space as well over the last many many years. I think we can do better now at understanding mechanistically how much can we rely on recycled jura? Is it is it a problem that we're not accounting for it super well in our systems now? Can we rely on it to a certain degree? And if you start to ask those questions,
(1:01:35) you just pull a lot of threads that we have. There's a lot of open questions there. So that's maybe just a shout out to future work. Um maybe a podcast in the future after we've got some data in that area. That's that's that could be a whole a whole topic in and of itself. Yeah. Yeah, for sure.
(1:01:58) Uh, I've got kind of a quick question. Um, we've had a few podcasts recently that talks about uh cow efficiency. We're just talking overall reproductive feed efficiency and and we found a lot of uh cow to cow variation uh and unexpectedly so. And I'm just kind of curious, is there any or do we know yet cow to-cal variation in terms of of how we efficiently utilize nitrogen? >> Yeah.
(1:02:26) So I would say I mean Susanna I think you guys should look at that with any any of these studies that are being done with concentrate feeding to individual animals. I think that offers a really interesting opportunity to be able to look at especially with large groups of animals over time. So like a full lactation study feeding individual animals set amounts of concentrate a really good opportunity to assess the marginal efficiency of use of extra concentrate that they're consuming.
(1:03:00) on on my summer data science project two PhDs with got together with Vasing University and TR nutrition where we are starting to look at that question as well using concentrate feeders trying to think about how to allocate concentrate to individual animals um and using metrics like individual animal marginal efficiency to make changes over time.
(1:03:26) So I think hand inhand with this idea of could we feed concentrate separate from P&R or forage base getting away from that TMR system there's more opportunity there for treating individual animals um the scope of difference in protein efficiency between animals I suspect it exists um it could be great it could be small I think we'll probably learn more about that in the coming years as more of these types of studies are done where we have the capacity to pull that out.
(1:04:02) >> Yeah, I think that's a very important question and we actually have talked about it a lot now that we have been designing the study and thinking about how to do it and and how you know number of cows we have to include because of this variability maybe in efficiency and being able to look at the individual efficiency then you need more also number of cows to be able to pull that uh information out.
(1:04:25) And then one individual variation is definitely in the use of the concentrate feeder that we have because some cows they don't they are not just interested in using it and we you know what can you do about it. So there is variation in also just if the cow is interested or not in in doing what we want them to do but um that's a different different type of individual variation I guess.
(1:04:48) Yeah, this has been an amazing discussion. You know, I constantly amazed at biology, right? The the astounding amount of information that we have learned and yet there's so much we don't know. And every time we uncover something else, there's just opens opens the the lens wider uh to discover many many things.
(1:05:07) And so, look forward to many many more uh podcasts with smart people like yourselves to kind of dive into this. Uh as we close uh our time together here, what I'd like to do is just kind of go around the room and ask each of you kind of to give us an overview of some of the key takeaways that our audience ought to take from the discussion today.
(1:05:25) And Laura, as always, I'll start with my co-host. >> Tonight's last call question is brought to you by Niasure Precision Release Niacin. NASCIN is a proven vasod diilator for heat stress reduction and a powerful anti-olytic agent for lowering high blood nepha in transition cows. Protected with balm's proprietary encapsulation technology, you can be sure it is being delivered where and when your cows need it.
(1:05:51) Learn more at balcm.com/niasure. Yeah. So, I think for me it's uh one of the key takeaways just as I've been kind of reflecting while we've been doing this podcast is that um the ability for the dairy industry to also be uh kind of flexible and that we had this old dogma of the limiting amino acid theory. And as we've discovered new research that the industry as a whole has been able to say, okay, well, maybe we weren't 100% correct about that.
(1:06:23) we have some new research that has shown differences and so maybe we need to start incorporating that into how we're feeding cows and discussing it and that sort of thing. And so to me that's really remarkable because you don't always see that happening in industries and just the fact that we're all open in understanding the fact that we know very little about the dairy cow and as we learn more we can adapt and change how we feed those cows and make them more efficient and make it overall more sustainable. Yeah, nice comments, Laura.
(1:06:55) Susanna, as always, uh you've been a great guest. So, thank you for joining us today. Uh what what are your final thoughts? >> Thank you for having me and especially this topic I I'm very passionate about and it's been great fun to talk about it with all of you and with Kelly also with all the inspiring research you are have done and will be doing.
(1:07:17) I'm very excited for for the future. uh in that sense I think what I want to kind of go you know people to take with them is is to remember how amazing cows are also in terms of this nitrogen and amino acids and protein nutrition we have the rin we have what happens post ruminally and the memory plant and this flexibility that Kelly was talking about and and I hope we don't forget also the rin and there is a lot also to to learn from there and and in terms of nitrogen efficiency and all this utilization of of amino acids and and microbial protein synthesis. We
(1:07:52) we should keep that in mind when we are feeding cows and thinking about nitrogen efficiency. >> Yeah. So, just kind of follow up on a comment. Uh Susanna, you said you're excited about the future as am I. And and one of the things we like to do here at Real Science Exchange is bring on young upandcomers uh like like the two of you folks uh here on the Real Science Exchange.
(1:08:14) And so you guys you guys have done a great job today. Kelly, um, thank you for joining us. Uh, you as well are an upandcomer. Uh, do you have any final comments for us? >> Yeah, I'll just emphasize again the keeping on this thread of flexibility. Um I I really see it as um an opportunity and I hope that whether that's nutritionists, farmers, researchers, industry, we we think about that as representing the opportunities for the future and not being afraid of thinking outside the box.
(1:08:50) And obviously the ruminant system is not afraid of thinking outside the box in terms of can I pull from here, can I use that? can be as efficient as I can with with what is being provided to me. I think that we can think about this that the same way whether that's at a firm level or an industry level. Um and then it also opens the door for what are hopefully transformative changes that continue to happen over time in the industry as we as we learn more.
(1:09:20) Like we said today, there's still a lot of open questions. So, we're going to need to be flexible to to to implement some of those maybe what seemed like crazy ideas now um going forward. Um certainly on the protein side, there's a there's a lot that can be gained. So, I'll leave it at that. >> All right.
(1:09:41) Well, thank you very much, Kelly, for joining us. Thank Thank you for all three of you guys for sharing your expertise, sharing your time today. It certainly has been enjoyable. To our loyal audience out there, thank you for coming along on the journey with us once again. I hope you learned something. I hope you had some fun and I hope to see you next time here at the Real Science Exchange where it's always happy hour and you're always among friends.
(1:10:02) We'd love to hear your comments or ideas for topics and guests. So, please reach out via email [music] at anh.marketingb.com with any suggestions and we'll work hard to add them to the schedule. Don't forget to leave a [music] fivestar rating on your way out. You can request your Real Science Exchange t-shirt in just a few easy steps.
(1:10:24) Just like or subscribe to the Real [music] Science Exchange and send us a screenshot along with your address and t-shirt size to an&h.marketing at balchm.com. [music] Balm's real science lecture series of webinars takes place on the first Tuesday of every month with the top research and nutrition topics that will impact your business.
(1:10:44) We also include small ruminant, monogastric, and companion animal focused topics throughout the year. Visit balm.com/realcience [music] to see the upcoming topics and to register for future webinars. You can also access past webinars [music] and search for the topics most important to