Exploring Flexibilities in Protein Nutrition for Sustainable Dairy with Dr. Kelly Nichols, UC Davis - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bIhWFOPYSNM

Transcript:
(00:03) 5 cents might not seem like much until you're saving 5 cents per cow per day. Then it really adds up. New Aminoure XM precision release methionine provides the optimal combination of cost, feed stability, rin stability, and intestinal release to deliver the best cost per unit of available methionine on the market today.
(00:28) [Music] Hello everyone and welcome to the real science lecture series. My name is Scott Serell, director of marketing at Balcam Animal Nutrition and Health. Today we welcome Dr. Kelly Nichols from UC Davis to discuss how protein nutrition can aid in sustainable dairy industry. Dr. Nichols earned her BS and MS from the University of GE and her PhD from Vagenan University in the Netherlands with a passion for advancing dairy nutrition.
(01:01) She since worked with leading nutrition companies and universities in research and teaching roles joining the University of California Davis in March of 2024. The Nichols lab studies how dairy cattle d uh digest and metabolize nutrients to better understand dietary protein and in uh energy interactions, memory gland function and nutrient conversion into milk.
(01:24) The research includes tissue level metabolite flux, energy and nitrogen balance, digestibility and milk production in response to nutritional interventions with strong collaborations with global animal nutrition companies and a top tier university research groups. Uh the Nichols lab offers students exciting opportunities for international experience through research exchanges and industry partnerships. Dr.
(01:49) Nichols, welcome back to the real science lecture series. The floor is now yours. >> Great. Thanks, Scott, for uh the introduction and the invitation. Um, and welcome everyone who who's tuning in. Um, so we're going to talk this morning about what I've called uh exploring flexibilities in protein nutrition for a sustainable dairy industry.
(02:17) Um here we have of course a very flexible cow uh able to ride this bicycle. Um but I'll explain what I mean by flexibilities in protein nutrition uh throughout this presentation. Before I get started, I just want to acknowledge the groups um many of those that Scott already mentioned um that I've worked with had the privilege of working with over the last 10 years or so.
(02:46) Um so the University of Galf nutrition where I was working uh before joining UC Davis uh and Vaninga University in the Netherlands. Um and of course uh my team here at UC Davis. This is sort of a preemptive acknowledgement. Um a lot of the topics I'm going to mention today and talk about those will be threads that my new team here will be pulling over the the coming years.
(03:08) So, um, a shout out to, uh, my new my new group here as well at UC Davis. So, to get started, kind of set the scene, um, why focus on protein nutrition? Of course, the ruminants are incredible. uh they have a lot of ability to be flexible in terms of the uh feed stuffs they consume, how they're able to break those down, work with them post-absorbively to make milk or put on body protein.
(03:43) Um but why do we care about how protein nutrition fits into this picture? Um of course we feed protein as much as possible. we want to come out as milk protein but there will always be a certain amount of loss through feces and urine contributing to manure nitrogen and this of course um is not news I'm sure to any of the listeners um there are substantial environmental concerns associated with nitrogen excreted from manure of our ruminants so we have ammonia emission um nitrous oxide being a very potent greenhouse gas um the implications for
(04:21) water bodies in terms of nitrogen runoff and of particular importance um and growing concern in some regions would be uh nitrate pollution in drinking water. So, I focus on uh feed protein to sort of look at all of these balances here um because imported feed on farm is usually the largest contributor to whole farm nitrogen balance.
(04:51) So, this is a good starting point if you're considering how can we mitigate some of this loss in terms of this whole farm system of nitrogen balance. um and often it is actually more than any imported fertilizer nitrogen. So that feed is contributing the most to the starting point of nitrogen balance. So depending on where you're listening from, I suspect many of you are somewhat familiar in one way or the other with what has been kind of dubbed the nitrogen crisis uh in Europe.
(05:25) So I spent the last 10 years living in the Netherlands. Um, I'm not going to go through the details of this that has been growing for decades and decades. But you've probably seen headlines such as this or photos in the media, farmers protest happening in the Netherlands, in Ireland, and some of the other European countries.
(05:45) The point um of sort of framing this up is what this represents is basically the impact of very intense pressure to fix what became an urgent environmental issue. So this nitrogen deposition onto the land in these very intensely populated areas with uh animal production systems and you end up with farmers feeling betrayed by the government and basically alienated by a general public that because as many of you I'm sure uh acknowledge have lost sort of that connection with where their food comes from and you end up with um a lot of intensive policy and a lot of
(06:22) just general social unrest. test. So, I've titled this not just a European problem because uh you're starting to see sort of growing intensity around this nitrogen issue in terms of pollution here in the US. So, these are two figures that I've pulled. Um the one on the right talks about the probability that groundwater systems in the US are violating nitrate regulations where the blue are areas with low probability of this.
(06:58) The orange are areas that have a high probability of violation and the red dots are areas that have already been observed to violate uh nitrate groundwater regulations in those areas. the figure to the left. Um, and just to note, this is relatively recent data. So, the figure on the left here, um, highlights areas that I like how this is framed as opportunities to fix nitrogen pollution.
(07:27) So, these are areas um, across the US that have the greatest crop land nitrogen surplus. And one thing for all of our dairy uh inclined listeners, if you're looking at these figures, you can probably see that a lot of those red dots or these red regions uh associate closely with areas where we also have a lot of dairy production systems.
(07:51) So, uh along the West Coast and along this region, which I'm not from the US, but you guys call this the Midwest, I'm pretty sure. Um there's a lot of cows up here and of course here in California. So, um, and you start to see some of these headlines, for example, this one from the National Natural Resources Defense Council, um, starting to mimic a little bit of what we've seen in Europe over the years.
(08:14) So all of this to say um we recognize that while ruminants do deliver a lot of efficiencies with respect to transferring human inedible feed stuffs into human edible food, human edible protein and other nutrients. There's also a lot of inefficiencies associated with that system. And this is something that we have to manage.
(08:37) And as I said, while I find that particularly the figure on the left in the previous slide to be quite optimistic in terms of framing it as opportunities to improve these potential problem areas. I do think that there's going to be a growing emphasis on things like nitrogen discharge regulations and nitrogen source air pollution.
(08:58) So, we talk a lot about methane. Um, but I think the nitrogen discussion is only going to grow and become more intense. Um, particularly here in the US. So, we're left with this question of how to deal then with manure nitrogen surplus if we start to limit what can be deposited onto the land. And one of the easiest ways to do that is to think about how do we reduce that manure nitrogen content.
(09:24) The other side of this of course lies with issues around resource availability which is something um that is a real concern uh growing concern these days in terms of you can think about that in terms of cost of our protein richch ingredients being really variable over time.
(09:44) Um and also the public perception of what we're feeding our production animals that sort of longstanding feed versus f food food debate. um GMOs, these types of discussions that can influence ultimately um all the way back down to the farm, what we're thinking about feeding our animals. So how I place sort of this idea of understanding metabolic flexibility in our ruminance that lies at the heart of basically being able to determine strategies to improve protein efficiency that align with the particular goals and requirements of individual producers.
(10:21) So, uh, farm A might have completely different pressures in terms of sustainability targets, motivations from, um, their supply chain of targets that they need to hit, limitations in terms of the ingredients that they have available that could be completely different than farm B in a different state or a different country or even just a couple of miles down the road.
(10:45) So understanding kind of the scope of the flexibility that we have to work in can allow uh for solutions for a variety of um kind of groups of dairy cows or or beef animals that are being managed. So what do I mean more specifically by flexibilities? Like I said, we have our feed protein going in, milk protein going out in our dairy cows, and we have manure nitrogen within the animal itself.
(11:16) Uh I kind of put this into three sort of buckets of areas. So we have the rin of course, we have the post rumin digestive tract and then we have the postabsorptive system. And within all three of these areas, there is sort of flexibility within. So flexibility for an example would be the ability to derive the same metabolites out of different uh resources.
(11:42) So we have flexibility within but then we also have the option for these compartments to interact. So an example being ura recycling where we have the post-absorptive system feeding back into the rin and then the potential for that cycle to continue which is something we'll talk a little bit more about um later in the presentation.
(12:03) And today I'm going to touch on three areas that I think illustrate this idea of metabolic flexibility really well. So that's the impact of energy source on protein metabolism. Um the capacity to think about room and nitrogen balance in a little bit of a different way and also memory gland and minor acid metabolism where we shown there's a lot of flexibility involved.
(12:31) So first we're going to talk about the impact of energy source. So to describe this, this is a figure from a colleague of mine, Jean Baptiste Danielle at Trout Nutrition during his PhD. This is a metaanalysis looking at the impact of uh incremental increases in protein supply. So a unit a unit increase in metabolizable protein supply here on the x- axis and then incremental increase in milk protein yield on the y ais.
(13:04) And the lines that you see coming across here represent again incremental increases in energy supply in these diets. And as you expect across all of those lines, we get this classic diminishing returns curve as we increase metabolizable protein supply relative to what goes out in milk protein yield. But what you see uh across um as we start to increase energy uh supply to these animals, we see an increase in milk protein yield at any unit of metabolizable protein supply here.
(13:39) So why is that? um en or protein synthesis is an energy expensive process. So by providing more energy, we can drive that production a little bit more. Amino acids themselves are gluccogenic. So they have the potential to be used for glucose to be used as energy. So there's can be a bit of a sparing effect if you provide more nonamino acid source energy.
(14:06) And then of course uh we have the fact that increasing energy supply can uh it regulates these um endocrine signaling responses that ultimately regulate protein synthesis itself. So this is clear. We know this well um it's been characterized well over many years. But a big question that hasn't really been sort of pulled apart is what about the source of that energy? We talk about energy but what does it matter where that energy is coming from.
(14:41) So what I mean by that energy source two sort of buckets that we can think about that would be gluccogenic energy. So in practice we're looking there at things like starch rich feed stuffs. So we have something like corn silage corn grain in concentrate feeds wheat in concentrate feeds. Under an experimental setting, we can test this uh by things like postruminally infusing glucose or ruminal infusions of propionate.
(15:09) So you see those types of models in the literature. And then we have lipogenic energy. So again practically this looks like our rin and fat supplements um feeding more fiber richch diets that are going to generate more acetate for example in the rin. And then again um in our experimental models we see uh examples of post-real infusion of fat or fatty acids.
(15:37) So to describe sort of set the scene in terms of this energy source question um this is some data from 10 years ago or so now um that I always like to use to start this off. Um this is some data out of INRA and France where they really did a great job looking at this question of the difference in energy source.
(15:58) So the figure here nitrogen intake on the x- axis and milk nitrogen yield on the y- axis um the symbols here represent uh milk nitrogen efficiency that transfer of nitrogen intake into milk nitrogen where the square symbols are a low crude protein diet 12% crude protein and the triangles are a higher 16%.5% crude protein diet.
(16:26) the dark filledin squares or triangles are a were a starchbased diet. So corn silage based diet whereas um the open symbols were a more fiberbased diet. And you can see very clearly here I've calculated the milk nitrogen efficiency for these clusters. The lipogenic diet had a lower milk nitrogen efficiency than the gluccogenic diet um across those levels of nitrogen intake.
(16:54) So that kind of sets the scene here and we dove into this in more detail during my time at Bath and then where we uh this is data from a study where we used an abomial infusion model here where we looked at low a low metabolizable protein situation and a high metabolizable protein situation that was done through postruminal infusion of essential amino acids and we infused either saline glucose or palm oline.
(17:24) So as a lipogenic energy source and what we saw was very similar to the previous slide, milk nitrogen efficiency increased with that glucose infusion uh regard independent of protein level. When we look at the impact of fat on milk nitrogen efficiency, uh just to describe the second study here that we did, this was a feeding trial.
(17:48) So we used a hydropom so a rumin inert fat source where again we had a low protein uh situation and a high protein situation and then a factorial with um fat inclusion in there as well. And what you see is that milk nitrogen efficiency if we look across both of these studies it tended to increase particularly at low protein levels when we included fat.
(18:14) So with this infusion you see the numerical increase here in this infusion study with the infusion of pomolene and then you see this trend for um an interaction where supplementing hydropom increased milk nitrogen efficiency at the low protein level. There's also been quite a bit of work trying to understand what goes on post-absorptively to sort of generate this shift in amino acid partitioning and ultimately efficiency of nitrogen utilization.
(18:49) So what we've seen and some of my colleagues is when we feed more gluccogenic energy or infuse more gluccogenic energy what you see in the blood so this would be arterial concentrations you see that increase in glucose we see a very distinct decrease in our branch chain amino acids and usually we see also a distinct decrease in lipogenic precursors like acetate and BHB.
(19:13) So what's kind of happening um in response to that glucose is stimulating this insulin cascade which while it does stimulate some turnover in muscle we're getting a pretty big response in extra memory lipogenesis. So that's turning on that system and what we're seeing is actually so those lipogenic precursors acetate and BHB are being partitioned towards that extra memory lipogenesis so atapost tissue and those branch chain amino acids specifically compared to the other groups of uh essential amino acids they can serve as fatty acid precursors.
(19:52) So we see them also being directed towards atapose on the mamary gland side. What we see then in response to this sort of shift in partitioning of amino acids of these fatty acid precursors is we see an increase in memory blood flow quite distinctly in these studies to maintain that output of milk protein and milk fat.
(20:18) So memory blood flow increases to pull more of those uh milk precursors into the uter in response to this shift in partitioning that's happening post-absorptively. And we'll talk a little bit more later about how memory blood flow plays into this kind of concept of flexibility. We've done this same analysis for studies where we compare with lipogenic energy and what we see is that it doesn't stimulate this cascade of post-absorptive amino acid repartitioning.
(20:49) So we don't get this big shift. We don't get this big memory gland blood flow response when we feed more lipogenic energy versus gluccogenic. So just to summarize uh on this part of metabolic flexibility, our gluccogenic energy pretty consistently stimulates milk protein yield and increases nitrogen efficiency, but it also stimulates this insulin cascade that can have consequences for partitioning of certain amino acids and energy metabolites.
(21:22) And we do see this uh shift in memory gland metabolism in response. On the other hand, lipogenic energy um looks like it can have some positive uh responses in milk nitrogen deficiency, particularly at low protein levels. But I have to underscore the fact that we really haven't there is not a very robust body of literature that really looks at feeding fat and the impact on nitrogen metabolism.
(21:47) I would still consider this a fairly big gap uh in our knowledge base and there's no insulin response at least in terms of how it impacts amino acid repartitioning. So kind of a take-home there would be what is the consideration of this for dietary ingredient inclusion especially when we think about more novel ingredients or our byproducts where we don't always have a great um idea of the nutrient composition or the variability that might exist there.
(22:18) So a question could be does this offer more glucagenic or lipogenic energy and then what could be the downstream implications for protein metabolism. And like I said, um I think on the lipogenic side, this is a pretty big gap still in our knowledge. So let's talk about the second sort of uh bucket of flexibility that I wanted to share with you.
(22:43) So this is around rin protein balance. So by room and protein balance depending on what sort of uh formulation system you're working within this might be defined slightly different but in general across the systems when we talk about room and protein balance what we're what we're describing is the difference between the maximum possible microbial protein synthesis that could uh be derived from the nitrogen available in the rin relative to the energy supply available in the rin.
(23:16) So you get where a zero is sort of the perfect synergy between that rin available nitrogen and energy. Um and negative would actually mean there's a deficiency in nitrogen whereas a positive value would mean that there's excess of nitrogen. So this is some data again out of INRA looking at uh an incremental increase in room protein balance and how that impacts urinary nitrogen excretion.
(23:45) And what we see here is the slope of that curve being or suggesting that around 80% of any additional room available nitrogen is basically being excreted uh in urine. So everything above that zero line you can think about as excess. And something that this makes me think about is how many of our diet formulation parameters they focus a lot on this idea of ruminal synchrony between protein and energy supply.
(24:18) A limitation that I see to that is that this assumes that nitrogen metabolism in the animal nitrogen recycling and the utilization kind of between those dynamics are constant. And in many cases this ignores the potentially substantial contribution from endogenous nitrogen sources. So this figure um here on the right represents the proportion of um gastrointestinal ura nitrogen entry.
(24:50) So that's ura coming from um coming from the liver uh relative to the digestible nitrogen intake of the animal. And what you can see uh something that jumps out at me from this data is one the variability uh in that proportion particularly in sheep and non-lactating cattle and how much less variability there seems to be in our lactating cattle.
(25:18) Um part of that has to do with the diversity of diets that are fed to these more growing animals versus our lactating cattle and just the number of experiments in this data set. So there's that's kind of the second thing that jumps out at me is there's far fewer studies looking at this sort of dynamics of ura recycling in lactating cattle.
(25:38) So in practice, what this sort of suggests to me is that there might be some potential here to rethink how we consider room and protein balance and it might be leading to sort of these excessive safety margins, you could say, for room and nitrogen supply if we don't have a good handle on some of these uh dynamics around nitrogen recycling and the potential utilization from this source.
(26:04) So this is uh some data out of Cornell. So a relatively recent study published. Um they looked at a few different diets. Uh but I just focus here on two of their treatments where they have a base diet and then a base diet with the addition of ura. So this room and nitrogen requirement, this is based on some values from CNCPS version 7 that I've sort of flipped around to represent room and nitrogen requirement.
(26:34) So they've added in ura here to basically um make this 100% of the room nitrogen requirement being met whereas the diet without ura is lacking a little bit in um predicted room nitrogen requirement. And then you see the impact on the crude protein content of these diets where the ura inclusion increases the fruit crude protein content slightly.
(26:58) So if we look at these two situations where you have a base diet and a base diet where you've just added some ura, the impact on dry matter intake, there was a tendency for slightly higher dry matter intake with that ura. Um, we'll talk about why that possibly is uh in a little bit later. No difference in energy corrected milk yield or milk protein content or protein yield with this increase in room nitrogen balance as one would expect.
(27:32) We did see it they saw a significant increase in milk ura content and then based on calculated milk nitrogen efficiency. So this is my own calculation based on their data. Um a lower milk nitrogen efficiency as you would expect alongside milk ura nitrogen. We have an increase in plasma ura nitrogen. And then based on CNCPS there was a a shared predicted urine nitrogen output being of course higher with that ura.
(28:03) and then um a non-significant but numerical increase in NDF digestibility when we have that extra ura which likely explains that slight increase in dry matter intake. So if you look across sort of this response to just simply adding ura to meet some kind of target in terms of roomin nitrogen requirement a takeaway that I have from this is that balancing for estimated rin nitrogen requirements in this case by adding ura so a rapidly degradable rin nitrogen source in this case likely increased nitrogen excretion. And I say likely because this
(28:41) is predicted urine nitrogen, but we see that back in milk ura nitrogen and plasma ura nitrogen. So it's likely that's happening with no positive impact on energy corrected milk yield and milk protein output. So, if we're in a situation where we're trying to reduce nitrogen excretion, do we really need to be supplementing this little bit of extra riner degradable protein to meet um a estimated rin nitrogen target? And how much then on the other hand can we actually rely on indogenous ura to compensate for um a slightly lower or
(29:23) providing a slightly lower room and nitrogen balance that we are kind of in control of. How much can we let the animal regulate room nitrogen balance versus what we try to manipulate with the diet? So what we know um from mostly studies with non-lactating animals and a few studies with lactating animals is that the proportion of hpatic ura output that recycles back to the gastrointestinal tract increases as dietary crude protein content decreases.
(29:57) But something that is a little bit less clear, particularly in more intensive dairy cow diets, is the impact of the source of rumin undergradable protein versus ringradable protein and the balance there. Um, and how that impacts this relative recycling of ura as we start to decrease dietary crude protein content.
(30:22) Because in reality, we're not really so much worried about the optimal crude protein content anymore. In practice, we're worried more about what is the composition of that protein and how is it serving the rin, the post rumin, the mammary gland. These are the things that we care actually more about. And then what are the underlying mechanisms that actually might be inhibiting greater return of ura to the gastrointestinal tract? particularly like I said in um sort of more intensive dairy production diets, I think there's a lot of open questions around why don't
(30:55) they necessarily capture as much ura as they potentially could based on um what we see in our non-lactating animals and those types of diets. There's a lot of knowledge gaps there and this is really an area that my team here at UC Davis is going to be uh looking at over the coming years. So, some comments to summarize on this idea of sort of reconsidering room and protein balance.
(31:23) Um, cattle can use indogenous nitrogen to support short-term periods of ruminal nitrogen insufficiency. And it's possible that depending on where we're operating at, we might be able to reduce some of that so to say safety margin that we add in in terms of rumin available nitrogen. This can be a route to reducing dietary group protein content and nitrogen excretion.
(31:49) So if you're in a situation where you do do have pressure on reducing that manure nitrogen content, this can be an area to consider. And as I mentioned, I really think this is an area where we need more understanding of this mechanism in lactating dairy cattle to really understand if this is something we can rely on going forward to improve nitrogen efficiency.
(32:16) And so for our last topic in this metabolic flexibility discussion, we're going to move to the mammary gland and talk about amino acid metabolism. So um I'm sure most of you are all aware that when we think about the digestible amino acid profile of course the most uh substantial portion of that is our microbial crude protein.
(32:43) And with this we generally assume that that is a fixed amino acid profile. We can argue um whether that's valid or not but that's what we're currently assuming. We also have of course room in undegradable protein and this is the fraction that we can work with in terms of what can be changed based on the ingredients that we're feeding.
(33:04) And the goal to optimize nitrogen efficiency through this means would be to aim for rin undergradable protein amino acid profile that's going to complement that microbial amino acid flow in some way. And then the question has become what is then that complimentary profile. So there's been a lot of work looking at this.
(33:32) Um this table I'm going to build it out. These are studies where uh different profiles of amino acids have either been infused postruminally or fed in a rin protected form. This column has the dose of the amino acids in grams per day. And then this column represents the marginal efficiency. So by marginal efficiency, this is the efficiency of use of every extra unit of supplemented protein.
(34:02) So the efficiency of every um efficiency of use of every extra unit of protein into milk protein yield. That's what this number represents. So in this first study um from 2010 you see the comparison between infusing a complete essential amino acid profile where they're used with a marginal efficiency of 31 versus the non-essentials which are basically not used efficiently in any way.
(34:29) Um and then when we sorry when we um add them together you see that sort of moderate marginal efficiency where basically what we conclude from here is that supplementing extra non-essential amino acids in terms of milk protein output um are not being used efficiently. This is some work um that I did in the Netherlands where we infused different profiles of essential amino acids.
(34:55) So we had this was sort of iso metabolizable protein doses. So the same amount of of amino acids in all of these mixtures just composed of different groups of essential amino acids. So the complete profile what I've called group one amino acids. So that's histadine, methionine, phenyl alene and tryptophan plus isolucine, lucine and veine.
(35:17) So what you'd know as the branch chain amino acids. than those group ones with arginine, lysine and thrienine included and then just the branch chain amino acids on their own. And you can see here again a very distinct difference in marginal efficiency. This complete profile compares very well with the complete profile here um from Helen Laap Pierre and colleagues.
(35:42) And you see that start to decrease essentially as the profile becomes further away from casein which in both of these experiments these complete essential amino acid profiles were formulated relative to uh their profile in case. And this is some more recent data where in this case these were this was a feeding study where we were feeding uh rin protected histadine, methionine and lysine and comparing that with the same amount of digestible amino acids coming from soy rin protected soybean meal and rape seed meal. So in this case you see
(36:22) a significant difference in marginal efficiency. Um one because the dose particularly here with just histine, methane and lysine is is relatively low. But then as we start to bring in these plant protein sources, we're bringing one non-essential amino acids into the mix. But you also have to consider the fact that the amino acid profile in these sources doesn't match that of casein.
(36:48) Whereas the formulation of this histadine, methane and lysine combination was also done in the profile of those amino acids in caseine. And you see this pretty stark difference in efficiency of use. So the takeaway here is that marginal efficiency increases as the digestible amino acid profile more closely resembles casein.
(37:12) So every unit of extra supplement protein that you give, the efficiency of that use will be higher as that profile more closely resembles casein. And there is the potential for even greater efficiency if we prioritize the essential amino acids within that profile. So, we're going to look a little more closely at the infusion study I mentioned in the previous slide where we infused these different groups of essential amino acids.
(37:41) And this is the milk protein yield response uh from that study where we saw that these um incomplete infusions where we did have the group ones present. So histadine, methane, phenol alanine and tryptophan, they resulted in the same level of milk protein yield as our complete infusion profile. So if those group ones are present, there's some flexibility apparently around how well uh the mammary gland can use these other essential amino acids to produce milk protein.
(38:16) So what are the sources then of this flexibility? How can this happen on the mammary gland level? So in the memorary gland we have blood flow moving across and we talk about amino acid uptake from blood and that represents the irreversible loss of amino acids into the mammary gland. The vast majority so around 90% of those amino acids end up being used for milk protein.
(38:44) And this is a number that's relatively consistent across a variety of dietary conditions. So I always say we talk about ruminants dairy cows being relatively nitrogen inefficient depending on how you look at it. The mammary gland itself in isolation is actually extremely nitrogen efficient. Some of those are going to be used to build back up constituent protein and some of those amino acids that come in are going to be transformed.
(39:10) they can be used for oxidation um to contribute to lactose and fatty acid synthesis and then they get transformed and in that way actually contribute back to milk protein. So this is sort of the the system that we're working within when we talk about memory gland amino acid metabolism. So that blood flow that's kind of the first um step as it influences then our estimation of uptake and what we see are fairly strong responses in blood flow to changes in essential amino acid profiles.
(39:45) So things like amino acid deficiency can increase memory blood flow. This is some data from a study where we removed histadine out of a complete essential amino acid infused profile. And what we see is this very distinct increase in memory plasma flow to try to account or try to adjust for this removal of what is a very important group one essential amino acid for milk protein synthesis.
(40:13) And similarly we can talk about this in terms of um great imbalances of amino acids that are supplied. So this is again that data or that experiment that I did with different amino acid profiles being infused where when we infuse just the branch chain amino acids and that very high load.
(40:33) we see an increase in memory plasma flow. Um my guess is to try to accommodate or try to adjust and pull in more of those other essential amino acids that would be required to maintain milk protein synthesis, not just the branch chains that were abundantly available in this case. So when we look within the memory cell, I'm going to there's there's several ways that um we can consider intramary flexibility.
(41:04) I'm going to use an example again from this study with these different amino acid profiles where when we looked at what we call the uptake to output ratio of these different groups. So uptake to output ratio represents the amount of an amino acid that got taken up into the memorary gland relative to um the proportion of that amino acid that ended up out in milk protein.
(41:26) So these group one amino acids methionine uh histadine phenolene and tryptophan they typically are taken up in a one ratio. So for every one unit of methionine that comes into the memorary gland, we find one unit of methionine back in milk protein. And that is what we saw consistently in this experiment. These other groups of essential amino acids, they fall into a category where we typically see them being taken up in excess relative to what comes back out in milk protein yield.
(42:00) And that's because they contribute to among other things the non the synthesis of our non-essential amino acids. So some of that uptake goes directly to milk protein as itself and some of those amino acids get transformed into non-essential amino acids and then contribute into uh casein synthesis. So in this experiment when we looked at the uptake to output of the uh essential amino acids that were being infused what we saw was this great excess of um that ratio for the groups that were being uh provided. So the
(42:43) groups and to put it the opposite the groups that were not included in the infusion. So in this case when we infused the group ones with isolucine, lucine and veene what we saw is that those other essentials that were not included arginene lysine and thrienine went more directly into milk protein as themsel.
(43:04) So their uptake to output ratio was relatively closer to one and then the uptake to output ratio of isolucine leucine and veene was much greater. So relatively more of those were kind of taking that load of contributing to non-essential amino acid synthesis for maintaining that same level of milk protein output. And we saw the opposite when we infused then the group ones with arginine, lysine and thrienine where the branch chain amino acids were contributing you can think of it more directly to milk protein.
(43:38) our gene lysene and threine were then contributing more to non-essential amino acids to maintain that same level of milk protein output. So to summarize around mamary gland amino acid metabolism and that flexibility, the profile of digestible amino acids impacts the efficiency of use of any supplemental protein. So practically we should be looking for ingredient profiles that could potentially enrich digestible protein with essential amino acids that match the profile of casein.
(44:15) This intramory compensation for nitrogen and carbon uh between our non-group one essential amino acids. This I think is still a really interesting question. um we've started to look at it in this way kind of I would say across the amino acid metabolism research that's being done but a big question I still have is what is the scope of this flexibility how does that potentially change or persist across lactation for example and then we can start to think about this as considering the profile of these amino acid groups not necessarily
(44:53) individuals If we understand that there's flexibility within the group, can we think about them instead as digestible amino acid targets uh for the group versus the individual? Might that give us more space, more flexibility when supplementing ringradable protein? So, some take-home messages to summarize kind of across all three of these areas of flexibility that I've discussed this morning.
(45:25) Energy source matters with respect to improving protein efficiency. So in this case we talked about the difference between gluccogenic and lipogenic energy. They elicit different effects on post-absorbive amino acid metabolism. Both have the potential to improve nitrogen efficiency but uh specifically around uh lipogenic energy. So fat supplementation there are definitely some open questions around kind of the interaction with improving nitrogen efficiency.
(45:54) We can think about minimizing randgradable protein balance as a route to achieve uh moderate increases in milk protein efficiency and possibly substantial decreases in urinary nitrogen excretion if this is something that um is a target in your situation. And to a degree, based on what we understand now, recycling of indogenous ura may compensate for periods of low room and nitrogen supply, but its actual utility at this point.
(46:27) Um, the dynamics are not understood well enough, particularly in lactating dairy cattle, to really um rely on it at this point. And the memorary gland is very flexible in how it uses amino acids. So considering these digestible amino acid groups um as a focus alongside balancing for individual amino acids might open up some space um for improving nitrogen efficiency based on the ingredients that you have available.
(46:56) So with that I'll thank you for your attention and I'll turn it back over to you Scott. I'm happy to take some questions. >> All right. Well thank you Dr. Nichols. Before we get started though with the Q&A portion, we'd like to share a brief video and then we'll be right back to answer the questions you've submitted during today's presentation.
(47:18) [Music] Balm has invested decades perfecting the art of nutrient encapsulation and now new Aminoure XL is setting a new standard delivering 35% more metabolizable lysine than leading competitors. With Aminoure XL, you can provide your cows with a more consistent and higher quality source of metabolizable lysine, leading to improved and more dependable results.
(47:53) A recent meta analysis found that feeding rin protected lysine led to an increase in milk fat percentage and 4.4 more pounds of energy corrected milk. Feed New Amunosure XL to your cows and have confidence that you're using the most consistent, reliable, and cost-effective source of lysine on the market today. Learn more at balcam.com/xl.
(48:17) [Music] All right, as a reminder, you can still submit questions through the Q&A tab at the top of your screen. Dr. Dr. Nichols, your first question I'm going to give to uh Dr. Zimmerman. Give him the honor. He's asking, well, first of all, he says, "Excellent presentation, Dr. Nichols.
(48:40) Uh, can milka nitrogen be used as a proxy to monitor nitrogen efficiency? If so, what are the recommendations for MUN levels?" >> Yeah, that's a common question. Um usually how I what I say in response to that is um monitor it can be used as a tool to monitor over time within a herd. So in that sense it is a starting point um for in the same group of animals or animals coming in and out of that lactating group.
(49:17) Um you know what the diet is that you're feeding them. Um, if you're seeing changes over time, that can be an indicator, you know, so if you're trending down or you're trending up, that can definitely be an indicator of potentially urinary nitrogen excretion. Um, and certainly nitrogen efficiency. uh I it's more becomes more difficult when you're using that to compare across different dietary situations because there are um different dietary factors like sodium, potassium, that type of thing that can impact how that ura is being partitioned
(49:52) into milk and urine. Um so it's difficult across different groups of animals but I would say within um one farm as an as a tracker it can be a good tool to start considering and in terms of values um again it it kind of is more about the trend that you're seeing. So if you make a dietary change and it goes down and animals are still performing well in terms of other targets that are of value to you, um that's kind of your starting point.
(50:29) >> All right. Very well. Next question comes in from Dr. Hutchkins. Do you look at economic responses to dairy farmers along with protein efficiency? >> I don't personally. Um but how Yeah, of course economics is super important. um where I see this it kind of at least from what I understand in the US in particular it drives a lot of the decisions around of course what you're going to do in your ration in terms of potentially improving protein efficiency or not really caring about it and that's kind of the context when I started this
(51:08) work when I was still in Canada the discussion was always around um protein being an expensive ingredient protein rich ingredients being expensive. Um, so get the best bang for your buck and make sure it ends up um in the tank, not under the tail of the cow. When I lived in Europe, that and sustainability was always second sort of under that economic discussion.
(51:32) Whereas in Europe, that was the headliner. Um, so how we really need to reduce nitrogen excretion, how can we manipulate the diet? cost of course being uh a major factor in what is an option to even consider. But the main thing was make sure that that transfer is efficient so that we don't have as much coming out under the tail of the cow so that you're not being um uh uh penalized based on your your manure nitrogen.
(52:03) So I think it is a central it plays a central role in the decisions that a particular operation might make around protein efficiency and the ingredients that you might choose to use. >> All right, thank you Kelly. Uh, next question comes in from Augustine. Any information on how load of fermentable carbohydrates alter ura recycling to the rin and its practical implications? Yeah.
(52:31) So we know that higher uh fermentable carbohydrate diets generally um the proportion of ura um that gets recycled is higher especially when paired with a relatively lower ringradable protein diet. So those are kind of the two combinations or the two factors that are go you would expect a relatively higher proportion of ura recycled to the rin.
(52:58) So that's um those are realistically the two things that you're playing with is protein level nitrogen for degradable nitrogen degradable protein in the rin and degradable or fermentable carbohydrate and that balance between the two because of course you can lower um protein and have a bit more ura recycling. But if you also increase the fermentable carbohydrate there's the possibility that that can increase even further.
(53:24) Um, again, why that happens and what are kind of the thresholds there, uh, I think are still question marks in terms of really getting into the transporters and what's driving, um, that pull so to say into the rin. >> All right, thank you. Uh, Dr. Aldrich uh, is asking, are there specific amino acids or groups that are more effective than others in stimulating milk protein synthes
(53:55) is machinery, i.e. E MT or C1 versus as substrate. >> Yeah. So those group one amino acids um histadine, methionine being the two big ones within that category, phenolene and tryptophan, we just have s so little um data on those specifically. Histadine, methionine. Um it's it's no secret that there are some pretty positive responses that have been seen when you supplement those even individually.
(54:27) Um methane in particular has uh sort of nonp protein related uh effects as well. Um so fat response as you see see fat response with a lot of amino acid supplementation but then also some of the benefits through transition that we've seen with supplementing methionine. Um but from a milk protein standpoint, methane and histadine are those group ones.
(54:48) So sort of by the definition of that one uptake to output ratio. Um there's inherently less flexibility there. Um you can think of that as going more directly into milk protein. Um whereas what we consider sort of group twos or those other ones the branch change arginine lysine thriionine what we see not only in my own work but the work of others who've worked in the space is that there is more flexibility once they're in the memorary gland and potentially more opportunity for either some inhibition at the transport level um how they
(55:26) interact with each other. So those group ones, those are for sure a priority. The group twos, so to say, um it does seem like there's more flexibility across those. Interestingly, lysine is in that group. Um so I think it's a great tool in the toolbox to have a a lysene product that can be fed.
(55:49) Um my interest is understanding when we're doing that, how is then that impacting kind of the scope of that flexibility with those other essential amino acids in the memorary gland to get the responses that we see. >> All right. Uh Yope would like to know uh in Europe, how can I increase digestible histadine in the diet without increasing total dietary protein? Yeah.
(56:14) So that's about looking at the composition of the ingredients that are being fed. So you have a certain amount of protein. You don't want to exceed a certain level of dietary crude protein. You're looking then at what's contributing to that. So your um more rin undergradable sources, what are those bringing? Unless you're using protected products like a rumin protected rape seed meal um or a rin protected um synthetic amino acid, it's more challenging to estimate what that digestible profile is going to look like. That's an area that um I think
(56:52) needs to expand a bit to kind of pair this idea that we know what they need post-absorptively. we have a little bit of a limitation in terms of um understanding well what's actually available as a to potentially be absorbed. Um so that's an area that we're actively working on. Um so just keeping that in mind in terms of shifting the total amount of crude protein what's coming from ringradable what's coming from degradable um and consider how histadine plays into that from the ringradable standpoint.
(57:26) So the histadine potentially um that's bypassing the rin and ending up in the small intestine to be absorbed from those ingredients that are um in that diet. >> All right, thank you. Adele says, "Excellent presentation, Dr. Nichols. What are your thoughts on supplementing antimicrobial compounds to produce ruminal damination and uralytic bacteria activity while providing a standard crude protein diet of 16% to lactating cows? [Laughter] Um, yeah, I would when I hear 16% crude protein and increasing urolytic bacteria, I would question a
(58:10) little bit if we might be exceeding the threshold of room and nitrogen requirements. Again, requirement is a difficult term to use there because it depends a lot on what the carbohydrate composition of the diet is as well. So um in general why the idea of reducing room and nitrogen balance is interesting with respect to improving nitrogen efficiency is you're the goal there is to reduce the amount of am excess ammonia that's available that ends up um going through the rin wall ending up in uh as ura from the liver and actually
(58:48) not getting recycled back to the rin but instead ending up in urine. So you want to minimize that as much as possible from the perspective of I'm not sure maybe you're getting at like could that potentially enhance your rea um yeah high levels of ammonia in the rin typically depress that how like I said the dynamics across the rin wall of the role the bacteria are playing that are sort of more epithelium adherent to influencing ura ultimately ending up as ammonia to be reused recaptured by microbes in the rin. That's an area um that we have
(59:25) still a lot of open questions about how that really looks in in practice. Yeah. >> All right. Uh next question comes in from Han. uh to what extent do you find is acid base balance important in considering the possibilities to reduce in excretion as both a more acid environment in the rin and the body can influence in partitioning and ura synthesis.
(59:52) Yeah, another one that's interesting to think about. Um I honestly haven't given that a ton of thought. Um perhaps that is another space for metabolic flexibility. Um, but definitely something interesting to consider. I don't know. >> All right. Uh, I see that we have passed the top of the hour.
(1:00:11) Do you have a few more moments? We've got a few more questions. >> Yeah. Yeah, I'm good. >> All right. Next question comes in from, uh, Rolando. Says, "Dr. Nichols, based on your work and the data you presented on lipogenic diets, I wanted to ask your opinion on the use of calcium soaps enriched with essential fatty acids as a fat source.
(1:00:32) Would you expect the nitrogen efficiency response to be similar to that observed with saturated longchain fatty acids or would you anticipate a different outcome? >> Um I would in general anticipate something I have to say I would anticipate something similar um to what we saw for example feeding the hydropom. Like I said, the um base level of pre- protein in the diet seems to have an influence again in the very limited data that is available.
(1:01:05) And because it's limited, the implications of the source of those fatty acids. I from what I've seen um there are none if very few studies that have really paired looking at nitrogen partitioning with the work that they're doing around fatty acid profile. There's a lot of great work going on about fatty acid profile, but um usually not paired with implications on nitrogen metabolism or mammary gland um amino acid metabolism, those types of questions.
(1:01:39) >> All right, next question comes in from Francisco. What should our practical safety margin be for rumin available nitrogen? >> That's a tough one to give a number. um you know a good starting point would be based on for example the new NA NASM 2021 um what's written in there if you look at the studies that are used to for those recommendations um it's pretty consistent with kind of what I've seen in the studies we've done so I think those are good starting points I don't think inherently those are excessive um
(1:02:17) and you have to be careful when you speak about that because it's all relative Um, like I said, it's relative to the fermentability of the carbohydrates in the diet. Um, that's a big one. Where this idea of kind of refining room protein balance started to come from um was talking to nutritionists who had an idea in their mind that they had to meet a certain target for that balance.
(1:02:44) So in the nunlands for example um they do talk about it on this scale of like zero is perfect balance and then anything higher um is is surplus. Um but a lot of the the school of thought is it needs to be at least let's just say 100 on a grams per day basis. That's or 150. It can't drop below that or you'll drop digestibility, dry matter intake, milk production.
(1:03:13) What we've seen is that that doesn't need to be such a high threshold. There is the capacity to reduce it, but those thresholds were sort of set in people's minds before we understood well um the ability for them to use indogenous nitrogen. So, it's more about questioning, do I sprinkle extra ura in there as a safety margin based on the targets of this farm potentially um you know uh uh limitations on manure nitrogen that they might be facing uh in terms of deposition? Um is that a smart do we need to do that for these particular animals? That's more it's more to
(1:03:53) stimulate that question in your mind of why am I putting that in there? Do we need it? >> All right. Thank you. We'll entertain one last question. When is a marginal efficiency too high? Aka they were deficient. >> Yeah, that's one way to look at it, right? Um, I would say this is an interesting question because a lot of this marginal efficiency work comes from relatively short-term studies.
(1:04:22) A lot of them are from infusion models. I've started to bring it into some of the feeding studies that I've done. Um but again uh in in a real life scenario you're feeding across lactation using that marginal efficiency to actually set targets for potentially dietary changes. That's something that we um I am working on in a collaboration together with Vathaninga is to actually make that marginal efficiency a factor that we consider for making dietary change as the animal responds to it.
(1:05:00) So in theory, if you have a very high marginal efficiency and they're actually deficient and you start to see negative impacts of that overall lactation, you might like in those cases we may be able to see, okay, that's not a good efficiency. Um potentially it's hard in these studies a higher value is good because that transfer of that supplement is happening very efficiently.
(1:05:27) Um were they deficient? potentially that could be why the efficiency is so high. Um, but the implications of that we can't really discern from those studies. >> All right. Well, thank you Dr. Nichols and thank you everyone for attending today's webinar. If you have additional questions, please submit them to ah.marketing.com. The real science lecture series continues with educational topics each and every month including our next two.
(1:05:55) the second real producer exchange on August 26 uh where we'll explore the process of consumerbased colostrum products and how to manage dairy operations in multiple states with produ with the producer Rob uh Deeper Deeper Sloot. And on September 9th uh we'll be joined by Dr. Phil Cardardoso from the University of Illinois for his uh presentation titled Optimizing Health and Reproduction Through Amino Acid Balancing in TR in the transition period. Visit balkim.
(1:06:29) com/realcience for details on future webinars and to register for upcoming events. Balkim's podcast series continues to offer a deeper dive into our webinar topics. Log on to your favorite podcast platform and search for Real Science Exchange or visit balkkim.com/mpodcast. And if you want a really cool Real Science Exchange t-shirt, just subscribe to the Real Science Exchange, send us a screenshot along with your address and shirt size to anh.
(1:06:57) marketing balcim.com and we'll get that off to you right away. And on behalf of Balcam and Dr. Nichols, thank you for joining us today.