Farm Management for the Future; DeVries, Guelph; Boerman, Purdue; Giordano, Cornell; Nelson, U of FL - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yFlZdvJJf3k

Transcript:
(00:09) Good evening everyone and welcome to the real science exchange the podcast where leading scientists and industry professionals meet over a few drinks to discuss the latest ideas and trends in animal nutrition. Hi, I'm Scott Sel going to be your host here tonight. And in this episode, we're joined by the panelists uh it's called the hot topic panel uh presented here at the 20125 ADSA uh annual meetings and the topic the title was farm management for the future managing for health, welfare and performance. Uh in this interactive
(00:40) session we're going to explore innovative approaches to managing cow health, welfare and productivity. The panelist will discuss milking, housing, feed technology, and health monitoring strategies. And this uh this panel was the brainchild of Dr. Corwin Nelson from the University of Florida. Corwin, if you don't mind, kind of give us uh some background on how you came up with this idea and how'd you select your your your panelist and and if you go ahead and introduce them, that'd be awesome.
(01:08) >> Yeah, definitely. Uh so this is our second year of doing the the hot topics panels. last year it it kind of kicked off large part because we're throwing into this H5N1 situation here and so that got this all rolling and it it was a great event so let's do it again. Um so as we're planning out where to go last night we did at the opening session we had uh kind of general uh what's the future of dairy look like and then uh today it's it's the the future of breeding cows that we're we're coming through and tomorrow um it'll be the the
(01:41) future of farm management. So um thinking about who's who covered those different areas and different people. Well here's some of the the obvious people that are are working at. So, we got uh Trevor Dere from GE over here who's going to uh cover the the future of how do we milk cows, how do we house cows and keep them that way.
(02:01) Uh we got Jackie Borman and and we also have Amy Ryman um from Purdue that will be covering feed technology, video technology, video analytics. That's Amy Ryman's area of expertise. And Amy's been or Jackie's been doing a lot then on uh uh monitoring of feed intake of cows, feeding behaviors. Um, so a great person to have that that covers that one.
(02:26) And then, uh, Julie over there from Cornell University on, uh, reproduction management, uh, uh, health monitoring. He's been doing a lot of work on that. The uh, Julie, you might tell us a project that you've been working on that the cow of the future. I don't remember the name of that, but of farm of the future. >> It's a test bed on demonstration site for data driven technologies.
(02:46) Um, so you know, the these are the the the world's experts working in these areas. So, who better to have that that come into this? So, that's kind of where this kind of got brought into to be pulled together on this. Yeah. >> Good. And I'm assuming last year was well attended and you're expecting the same this year.
(03:03) Do does the audience get ask questions or is it mostly the moderator? >> Yes. Uh, so we we'll start off with a just a leadoff question or two. Um, we'll kind of see where that goes. Um, but then a a great thing that we use is Slido, right? So that we encourage the audience use Slido to to submit their questions.
(03:22) Slido is a nice tool where it will go and and kind of populate up there and people can vote on the questions they like as they see them on there or um you can pick the ones you want. There's questions that are irrelevant or inappropriate. You can delete those questions um and and control. >> Does the moderator do that or do you have time to do that? Yeah, you and it's actually it it's I haven't used a whole lot, but it it's pretty quick to use.
(03:45) So, yeah, >> I'm not sure if anybody else has used Slido for anything, but yeah, it's it's it's a slick little tool. >> Yeah. So, you know what I'm going to do? Since you're the co-host today and you're going to be hosting tomorrow, I'm going to I'm going to give you the reigns and uh let you kind of take it from here and pretend like you're doing it tomorrow.
(04:03) How's that sound? >> Yeah, it's a good good way to practice, too. So, >> absolutely. Tonight's podcast stories are brought to you by Reassure Precision Release Choline. Reassure is the most researched encapsulated choline on the market today. Consistently delivering results to your transition cows of higher peak milk, reduced metabolic disorders, and even inutero benefits to her calf, leading to growth and health improvements. Visit balchm.
(04:27) com to learn more. >> Yeah. So, what we're going to do is just give everybody kind of a leadoff time to kind of explain their area, what what they've worked on, where we're kind of give a little bit of a background to say it's a milking management uh housing and we're at and where it's going to the future.
(04:45) So yeah, the opening question that we have is what's the future of farm management just broadly, but then you know each person will take and and give their two cents on on here's where it is currently, here's where it's going in the future. So Trevor, you got nominated to go first. >> I did. Yeah. And it's a it's a tough question, but I'll I'll I'll introduce myself a little bit first.
(05:08) So Trevor Diss, a professor at the University of G. Um been there almost 20 years. Uh my background and training is in dairy cattle behavior and nutrition and largely built a research program focused on the intersection of those two but then extending it beyond particularly using behavior as a metric for understanding um not only nutritional management but housing management uh the interaction with health management and using automated tools.
(05:40) And so a lot of things that we're discussing here uh in my with my fellow panelists here too is is areas that we've been working in over the years as well. And yeah, we've we've really done a lot of work in in recent years particularly on on milking management of cows uh particularly related to technology and use of automation and and 20 years ago even 30 years ago when robotic milking for example came onto the market.
(06:07) Um there's people who probably forecast at that time period that in 20 years we'd be milking all cows with robots. of all, we're not milking all cows with robots today, but we are milking a significant number of um uh cows today with with robots. And my example is in Canada, we in that time period over 20 years, we went from 2% to over 20% of our cows currently being milked with robots.
(06:32) And and and it's one of those things that and it's not just automated uh single box robots that we talk about. But it's it's other automation that we're starting to see in uh relationship to milking management. Particularly we see automation in not only the whole milking process but components of that process largely done as a way to improve uh labor efficiency, reduce labor uh on farm.
(07:01) And then also what's interesting uh particularly with the in what I would say are smaller to medium-sized farms it actually the number one reason given by farmers is actually quality of life and it's comes with a changing demographic not only in society around us but we even see that in our agricultural society our our farming families where they're looking for different things as well and and different opportunities and looking to use of technology for milking but also other things uh are providing them opportunities to do that and and be
(07:33) more flexible with time with family and and with uh work schedules. So uh those are those are things that have already happened to some degree and I'm going to I guess my my prediction hat would say we're going to continue on that road. It's it's really hard to predict the future of of what that looks like, but my my guess is that we're going to see incremental automation or adoption of various automated tools that are going to continuously replace human labor in in the manufacturing process, so to speak, of milk. Um, and and particularly from
(08:09) the milk harvesting standpoint, you you can't walk into a manufacturing facility today without, right, a product being produced by robots, right? and and technology. There's very few handmade things in in today's uh uh manufacturing process. And some might argue that farming is a little different.
(08:30) Uh but uh at the same time, we have a lot of opportunities there. And I think we're going to see more as as we move forward. So, do you see uh sorry, I I do have a question here, but um so [clears throat] I was recently at a very large dairy and they they do have I think it's a 800 cow uh robotic uh barn.
(08:53) Um and they basically said, "Listen, we love it for the cows. It's the cow comfort's amazing. We get great milk out of them, but it's not cost-effective." And so when they asked, "Would you do it again or would you build another one?" They said they would not. And so I'm going to Is that kind of typical? And then do you kind of see maybe the robots kind of finding themselves in a niche on maybe some smaller to mediumsized dairies? >> You know what it it it it really depends on the circumstance.
(09:20) It depends on the farm. Uh I use the example we have in Canada. Like again what you just said there, the small to medium farms, it makes a lot of sense not only and and and the farmers there actually it's interesting. They don't even put economics always as their number one reason, right? There is some of these other things like >> quality of life, >> quality of life that even comes ahead of that, right? So, but uh that being said, we do have large dairies.
(09:44) Uh we've we've have large dairies in Canada milking with robots. There are other ones in the US. There's other ones uh worldwide that are implementing it. And and in those cases, they're doing it uh pretty well primarily from a labor efficiency and and and labor standpoint. And it really depends on the economic situation and how those are managed.
(10:03) But there are ones that are doing and uh quite well and and very profitable. And so um I think in the case that you described that that's an individual case, there's going to be other ones like that. Uh just like you can walk onto a a par milking herd which is under the same situation, right? And so I think what it comes back to is is the the management of uh those facilities and those herds and um yeah and what the expectations are as well of the people that are managing those.
(10:33) I'm going to jump in and ask one more question as long as we're talking about this and and just implementation of robotics and certainly we see maybe more so in the US side here of these larger farms that uh yeah that maybe the the typical robot that you see isn't maybe doesn't fit their model but do we see at some of these parlors becoming more automated in the parlor and that's going to be more the approach.
(10:59) So, how do we see the the typical parlor that we've seen rotaries for example? How is that going to change in the future? >> Yeah, and that's that's what I alluded to. I think we're going to see more automation within those. We see it already, right? There's automation in terms of prepping of cows of of pre-ipping cows, even even uh yeah, post- dipping cows even attachment.
(11:20) There is automated rotaries, fully automated rotaries that not that not only right, they prep the cows, they attach the cows as well. And again, that's the working those systems in terms of the technology and improving it takes some time and it's going to continue to take some time, but I could imagine in yeah, again in 10 20 years that we're going to see almost full automation on a lot of milking parlors as well, right? And um and then the choice between that and a what we'd call a box robot becomes how you want to
(11:52) manage it. and and there's potentially benefits for different farms and different situations with both of those. So, uh my my future would say we'll probably see full automation uh on regular parlor, so to speak, as well as our box robots that we have today. And and we'll see yeah, people choosing based on what they want to achieve and and and how they want to manage their farms.
(12:18) one of the leading um um dairy equipment companies last week at the precision dairy conference just presented a fully automated uh milking unit for parallel paddlers. Right. So uh the the human only must attach the unit and and the unit completes the entire milking routine. So that that's quite interesting you know because a lot of those large dairies right they struggle with the idea of you know boxes um or box robotic milking and then with uh the uh rotaries which are very expensive.
(12:51) I wanted to ask you Trevor about the uh batch milking so batch robotic milking what your thoughts are. I don't know if there is enough of that already. I mean I know >> there's there's some um examples of that being used. I would compare it to not being that much different than having a fully automated uh rotary parlor for example, right? Where the cows, you're bringing up the cows in groups, they're getting fully they're getting milked fully automated, right? So basically the machines are doing all the work and
(13:23) they're going back on a set schedule, right? And so and the batch milking is quite similar to that, right? because the cows are getting brought up. They're going to be allowed to go through those milking units and then go back to their pen. And so that's kind of what I was alluding to before is that I think there's a place for that management.
(13:42) There's still going to be some desire to have um yeah, what we would say is is more free access where the cow can go milk all the time. Some have described that uh the ability of that cow to have autonomy, so to speak, on her time as having benefits, right? and and and have make choices in her life and feed when she wants, lie down when she wants, milk when she wants, and so and there might be some benefits over that in in certain circumstances.
(14:10) So, um again, I'm not saying either way that it's one's going to be the future or the other. I think there's a place for that. uh from a at least from a equipment cost standpoint at this point I'm not sure how much that makes more economic sense than having say an automated rotary system but >> it doesn't change the ratio of cows to robots uh with batch milking >> um it it it yes and no because if you want to get those cows mil through quick enough >> you have to >> you need to have right if you don't have enough robots you're going to end up
(14:44) with the problem we had on dairies 10, 15 years ago and that was cows standing around too long in in holding pens, right? Where they're standing waiting to be milked for 45 minutes, an hour, hour and a half, right? Some of those tail enders. So that's the challenge there. So if you want to not have that, then you're going to have to have many of those units.
(15:05) And that at this point at least, I'm not 100% convinced of the economic Yeah. um benefit of that, so to speak. I want to jump to our next topic which is future feeding cows. And so this is something that Trevor's certainly been involved in in feeding behavior. We're going to kind of focus more on on Jackie's been working over here too on on monitoring feed intake and and her colleague at Purdue Amy Ryman's been working on this more on the video analytic side.
(15:35) So maybe Jackie, you want to just give a little bit of a background there on uh what you've been doing in that and then you can touch on a little bit on what Amy's been doing as part of that too. >> Right. So my name is Jackie Borman. I've been at Purdue University for almost eight years and in that time um my focus is on nutrition and management and I've been working with Amy Reedman for about six and a half of those years and she really is a expert in video analytics.
(16:01) So, we started looking at dairy farms and I don't know how I convinced her to work on dairy farms because she's an engineer and there's a lot of things that you could be videotaping that are a lot cleaner than dairy farms. But we started thinking about what information could we extract from an animal or from feed that would be interesting and would provide value back to the end user.
(16:24) So, some of what we've done relates a little bit to what Trevor was talking about, but um we're looking at cows and we're trying to predict their intake. And as a nutritionist, I would love to know um how much those cows are eating. And then we're also trying to estimate how much they weigh.
(16:42) So, I would love to know accurate body weights, how much cows are eating. Um that would be really valuable. It it's easier to say that you can do it than it is to do it. Um but that's kind of the direction that we're going. Can we get better estimates of how much feed a cow is consuming and how much she weighs and combine that with information about milk production so we can make some real improvements on feed efficiency.
(17:06) And whenever we're designing these systems um because I think that an important part of this is we want technology to be able to be used across a large number of farms without disrupting the farm. So it has to come into that farm and provide benefit and not be cumbersome. So we can't alter what the cows are doing. We can't take a whole lot of time when we're designing these systems from what their day-to-day um just normal management would be.
(17:33) So that's part of what we've been doing. And then the other part is looking at during the feed mixing process of evaluating the uniformity of that diet. So, as feed is mixing, can we assess is this diet uniformly mixed or do we have an issue either with the operator uh or the equipment or the ingredient order? Um, and can we try to make some improvements to get a more consistent diet in front of cows? >> Good.
(18:02) Good. So, where do you see some of this being adopted into the future already taking place? What's what are some of those potentials that we really have out there right now? Yeah, there's definitely already some commercial applications for video monitoring feed. Um, there's some instances where it's really uh maybe a text alert to an operator saying this pen is either out of feed feed them or pushup feed.
(18:25) So, some of those things already exist. Uh, there's a lot of applications for video that already exist on farm and I think it will increase. Um, one nice thing about video is that it it doesn't get tired and it doesn't need to take lunch breaks and it doesn't work an eight hour day.
(18:44) So, in theory, we can have video working all the time. And we can design systems that are getting multiple angles of the same thing and maybe providing a lot of different information about either the feed or the cow or the interaction between the people and the cow and the feed. So I think there's a lot of potential benefit for video and I think in the US um which is where I have my uh basis of knowledge we see more farms that are willing to put in cameras and maybe they're extracting data from those cameras or maybe they're just having it there. So there's a little bit
(19:19) more on some farms. Um acceptance of having cameras there so we can see what is going on and potentially extracting that uh information is the next step if they're not already doing it. >> So this this question might be jumping ahead a little bit to maybe what more of Julio is working on in his area, but you think of this idea of of we got a lot of uh monitoring activity and rumination.
(19:44) And obviously rumination goes ties very well to feeding behavior uh and monitoring uh that. So do you see any possibility of of some way finding a system that works that that connects those two together? Uh the the video analytics plus the rumination so you can really pinpoint those cows much more accurately and and understanding what's taking place with the cow.
(20:10) I think for sure and some of that already exists as well where we're trying to get intake um because we're basing it off of time at the feed bunk and rumination activity and then we'll put input pen level intake data and it'll give us an um ranking or a number that maybe is not 100% accurate but gives us some indication of intake. So if we can combine that and validate with video or back that information up with video I think that that could be really powerful.
(20:37) >> What about body weight? Do you think cameras can maybe estimate body weight? >> Yeah. So, we have um some published work that cameras are a lot better at estimating body weight than humans are. Um and especially because if you're looking at a cow walking by and as a nutritionist, you think that you're good at it and some are, but uh you're only looking at it from one angle.
(20:58) But you can design camera systems where they're looking from multiple angles. And we know that there's several attributes about the size of the animal that's going to be an input into body weight. So if we can look from above and from the side at the same time, we get better estimates. >> So Jackie, one of the things that I'm wondering about uh which is critical, right, for any um video monitoring is um cow identification uh in pens, right? So we know single lanes, I mean that's done uh it works relatively well, but you know what about
(21:28) having a pan of cows and especially if you think about our relatively larger herds, right? And then related to that, I mean, uh, every how often are you going to have to have a camera in a barn in order to be able to identify individual cows? >> Yeah, I think you probably Okay, so many questions there.
(21:50) Okay, so um there are definitely there is the capability of localizing those cows and identifying those cows based off of pattern. So some of it Dr. Reebin can talk about tomorrow. Um but there's a lot of advancements that have happened in the last 5 years with being able to localize those individual animals and then identify them.
(22:10) Some of it could be on pattern but some of it could be on other attributes of the animal which works pattern works for holiness maybe less so for other species. And then I think we have to prioritize for cameras. Are there critical pens where maybe it makes more sense to monitor a fresh pen for instance and then do we put cameras just in that area or are there critical points in the pen that are more interesting than others.
(22:34) So when we started with our camera projects we just had cows as they exited the return alley because they're single file and it's easy and we can get some information about uh locomotion but also body weight um and >> body condition >> body condition. So you could get quite a bit of information about the animal in their single file and it's easy but you're right as we move to that pen setting it becomes harder but also more interesting.
(23:01) >> Absolutely. >> But but we >> is a lot harder. That's the problem. >> Yeah. But we started like facial recognition on humans right >> like 30 years ago right or or longer right? So it's it's not impossible right? >> It's it's not impossible. And even at this meeting a couple of years ago, there was a group that was doing um like nose prints and being able to identify cows because of unique nose prints.
(23:27) So there's a lot of things out there um that that I think we could explore. >> Yeah. And one of the things we've talked about before, but and I think in this topic of like what is the future, right? Like my future actually would be that we have a camera system that does everything, right? And we've got cameras everywhere.
(23:46) We're measuring, like Jackie said, we're measuring, right, who the cows are, what they're doing, right? When they're doing these things, what their body condition is, their health status is, their repro status, right? Measure, monitoring the feed, monitoring maybe even employees, right? And again, that's that already happens, right, in in many situations, right? Not only in agriculture, but that's that's happening on a on a lot of fronts.
(24:09) So I think I think if we look if we think big there's a lot of opportunity there but there's still a lot of and and that's what I know Jackie and and her colleagues are coming across there's there's a lot of challenges in that too right and but challenges are always >> yeah fun >> fun and yeah we can we can work through those right I don't think there's any insurmountable ones that time won't be able to handle right so >> so what are those challenges is it uh expense uh is it just the the algorithms to to to estimate these things.
(24:40) >> I think there's a lot of challenges that exist. So, we think about putting video cameras on commercial farms. Well, they're going to get dirty. They're going to break down. So, there's some challenge with expense of replacing equipment. The big challenge that we see in I'm in a pretty rural state is cameras and video.
(24:59) It's just a lot of data. So if we're going to process that data at Purdue and we have to transfer that data that becomes a challenge because of internet connection being able to transfer large amounts of data. So I think we a challenge is getting processing done on the farm so we don't have to move data. So um I but again surmountable we could do things like that but there's you guys may be able to contribute with other challenges too.
(25:25) Um, in my experience, uh, as the, uh, director of the test bed for the farm of the future at Cornell and playing farmer and having to buy the technologies and install them and get them to work, there there are still a lot of issues that that we need to deal with. You know, it depends, of course, on the system that you're talking about.
(25:48) Some companies have figured out a lot of them. Others are still a little bit behind. Now, I do agree. I think it's just a matter of time until most of those things are resolved. But uh internet connection. So you realize when you want to bring in all this technology to find that you need uh Wi-Fi everywhere and you need you know very solid Wi-Fi and uh you start installing all these boxes everywhere and you start running out of poles and you start running out of outlets to plug things in uh because uh you know it's just you know every so
(26:17) often in the barn you have to have the cameras and the uh environmental sensors and the antennas for the wearables and you know all of a sudden you you run out of uh uh resources in the barn. So th those are some of the challenges. Uh cleaning cameras. Uh you know be very careful where you put your cameras.
(26:34) You know put them in a place that you can reach them relatively easily. You know we are already dealing with some of those issues. >> But that I I and I just reminded me I had a conversation with someone about this earlier actually and they said they said well that's not a problem. We already have right on the robots they have a camera on there that has automatic cleaning. Right.
(26:53) And so, right, >> why can't we have automatic cleaning on some of the cameras that we have? >> There is there's actually a very interesting very cool system. It has this um it's for uh uh for feet, you know, it's you know, it goes uh at the um exit of the sword gate and it has this wiper, this windshield wiper with with water actually because it has to be constantly uh cleaning that.
(27:17) There are some challenges and this is one of the reasons why I ask you about IDing cows. um you know with uh even with single lane you know you know the systems that we have been able to work with they are pretty good and going back to Scott's uh question uh the idea of integrating all these different systems uh just as an example uh a camera technology that works at the parlor exit if you combine it with the RFID from your parlor so if um it's not the same to have to look because these systems have videos of each individual cow, right? And they
(27:52) have to go and and match the cow that just went under to the database. So when the algorithms are trying to match, it's a lot easier to match on one side of the parlor where you have, in our case, we have 16 cows, milk on each side. So with RFID in the parlor, you know that these 16 cows are the ones that just went under the camera uh versus having to look into in our herd 600 cows.
(28:18) So it narrows down the group you know and we have seen in our own data like improvements from the mid70s high7s for cow ID into the high 90s right so there are all these tricks and these things that we can do by bringing together different data streams that will help make all those things a lot better >> and I think we have to collaborate with like I'm a nutritionist I have to collaborate with engineers because I wouldn't think of that but when they're trying to say we're trying to pick the best match and if we can limit that it
(28:50) improves the speed at which it can do that. So >> Julie you brought a good a good point like say for example coming into the parlor and these are just kind of practical things that run into on farms that happen of so they're tracking RFIDs as they go into the parlor. So you got 16 all of a sudden you got a pen of heers you got 17 18 animals are in there.
(29:13) So all a sudden everything is thrown off. We we run into this problem for example where we have >> what do you mean that you have how do you have more if you only have a certain number of stalls in the parlor >> see that I'm I'm giving an example sorry sorry I'm giving an example an outdated part hering pone system where they can run more I I have practical experience seeing this happen from uh on our own dairy where uh we see this happen >> I can see that happening in in hering bone yes yeah where in that type of case and and also you're trying to get exact
(29:42) milk weights and I'll all a sudden you got the extra one in there or yeah you just you you there's mistakes that h practically that just happen on farm of you know you you lose ID of a cow or something like that and it just presents some noise in the data that are just things that you have to stay on top of in order for that to work right.
(30:01) >> Absolutely. And let me just give you one example. uh you're trying to get the parlor to talk to the camera system, right? And the cows are going under the cameras right now, but if the parlor doesn't send the ID right now, right, you you you have a delay there. So, the camera system may not be able to identify the cows right now.
(30:22) So, you know, you have to play with timing with, you know, algorithms and how things are used based on, you know, things that you don't think about until you have to deal with them. But this >> tons of examples of things like that. >> But this is where like working with the engineers on these things because when we describe these like we see these as real problems, right? But then you tell these things or describe these things to engineers sometimes they're like, "Oh, that's not a problem.
(30:46) We can right like >> that is what it is. It's like I had a meeting with Dr. Reuben on Friday and I was like, "Oh, this is like when the cameras get dirty," she's like, "Oh, we could just do an anomaly detector and then that'll be cleared up." And I'm like, "Oh, okay. That exists. and then it gets dirty again. >> Yeah, but then at least it's an alert or it's something.
(31:07) So, I think that there's a lot of solutions that exist, but we just need to be the people to say this is our problem and help us figure out what the best solution is because we're not the most advanced in a lot of these areas. Other people are doing it, have been doing it for a long time. So, we can apply some of what those people have done to our industry.
(31:27) There's also an element of uh shifting the type of labor that is necessary on farms, right? So, the cameras will eliminate or minimize the need to be observing cows. Uh but people will have to probably spend time cleaning the cameras, right? So, you know, there are tradeoffs with these things. You know, it's the same thing with wearables, right? I mean, you're not watching cows to see if they are in heat or not.
(31:50) You're just replacing coilers that break or, you know, any type of sensor, right? So, as long as, you know, the gain on using the cameras is more than the cost, you know, in terms of time and effort, you know, it's it's valuable, right? And >> and that's that's always really important, too, because it just reminded me of a of a story I have with a farmer where we're describing an issue they were having with a piece of automation in their barn, right? And I said, "Well, you just got to do this and this." And
(32:17) then he just looked at me blankly and said, "Well, I didn't buy this to create more work." Right? So and and and that's a real challenge with some right especially more emerging technologies sometimes but right just even changing the mindset and right and and adapting to different ways of doing things it can take time and we can gain efficiencies in some of those things too sometimes I think that brings up a good point that there's got to be when these are implemented they got to be set up for success right that uh we've we've
(32:50) probably all seen plenty of cases where something has come in the the setup wasn't right, the environment wasn't right, people weren't prepared, implement, and all a sudden something goes wrong. What do you in the end you got to make sure you get cows milk, you got to get cows fed. That that's baseline for everything you get done.
(33:08) So you you pull out of it and say, "Okay, never mind. That doesn't work." When in reality, it can work, but you got to be set up for success. >> I I always say that um we're we're going to go from and we are going already. It's happening. I mean it's not even just in the future from managing cows to managing automated systems right again you have to manage them properly for them to deliver the results right that you know that you need for managing cows better we're going to manage cows through managing those systems you know
(33:38) that's that's the mindset change that has to happen >> I we we haven't talked specifically on on managing reproduction and health and now there you may want to kind of split those into two different topics or put them into one I'm Not sure how you want to do that, but that's kind of what uh you've focused on many things on using the farm of the future and that, but kind of talk specifically what's the future of how we're using all this for managing reproduction and and how we're we're managing monitoring health of
(34:08) cows. >> So, in fact, I think that there are a lot of commonalities in in uh reproduction health even, you know, welfare monitoring. So anything that has to do with monitoring and management I I personally think that there there are a lot of uh commonalities and overlaps you know in terms of the data that is valuable and or needed to manage reproduction and health u mostly behaviors physiological parameters performance parameters that u as long as they are associated with our outcomes or events of interest I mean the the
(34:42) technologies are the same and the great the easiest example is you A lot of the wearable sensors that we have, you know, whether it's an ear tag or or a neck tag or a rumininal bald that, you know, as long as they monitor more than one of the parameters of interest, they can be used both for reproduction and for health.
(35:03) And I would argue that for monitoring well-being as well and nutritional, you know, management, you know, aspects of uh nutritional management. So you know there are of course differences but in general uh we we are working with them um you know as as as a whole and uh what what I see in the future uh and not not a very distant future.
(35:25) Of course it depends on you know where do you want to draw the line with some of these things is you know the the concept of uh precision or targeted you know management both uh reproductive management health management and um what what we are working towards you know our research groups many of the research groups as well as companies touch cows the least possible and intervene as much as possible on those cows that truly need intervention.
(35:54) Whether it's an intervention for reproduction to get the cow pregnant to monitor the reproductive status of a cow or to know if a cow would benefit from a treatment, right? I don't even want to say, you know, find and see cows or not. I mean, you know, can we find the cows that would benefit and I shouldn't even say treatment, I should say again an intervention.
(36:17) An intervention could be uh a true treatment to deal with or to ameliorate or reduce clinical signs or could be a preventative intervention that prevents the cow from developing a clinical health disorder. So again I think that that's big picture the idea can we point out to the individuals that need interventions and uh we are there to some extent and uh um a lot of research has been done uh in the last 10 15 years and and we are in a much better position today than where we were back then.
(36:51) Reaper has been always a little bit easier to deal with. A cow in heat is is a lot easier to identify that a cow that is undergoing uh a health disorder in early lactation. Cow behavior or cow physiology in early lactation is very tricky and you know all the effects of cving uh on a lot of the behaviors and the parameters that we measure.
(37:11) So I think that we still have a lot to gain there a lot to you know understand and deal with but in general we are doing pretty well. In the future, what we need to keep working on is refining a lot of the algorithms, a lot of, you know, the decision- making tools to go tell, you know, to tell which are the cows that need attention and of course machine learning, the fancy uh the fancy technology, the fancy, you know, uh word concept.
(37:36) Today we are all trying to work on that and uh we are making a lot of progress. uh is challenging because there are a lot there are way too many algorithms there are too many ways of analyzing data that you know uh maybe Jackie will do it one way we'll do it completely different way and then it's a little confusing as as you get results and things like that um but um uh there is a lot to improve uh in that and data integration of course is absolutely critical for that uh so the more we can bring together Scott you asked that question earlier and you know
(38:08) is there any benefit Absolutely. We just still have to distill. We have to get to what is the data that is the most valuable to make the best predictions and is the cheapest possible to generate, right? I mean, because yeah, we could have 25 30 different things on a farm and it's just cost prohibitive, right? So, what are the key parameters that we can monitor that will lead us to those cows that need attention? So, >> you you bring up a good point there, data integration.
(38:35) As you're [snorts] saying that, I'm thinking about the the different topics that we've all touched on here and and you think of the the transition cow or the fresh cow problems there and and uh how they they touch on each one of these things that we've talked about from milk production. they going to have decreased milk production probably driven by a decreased fit in feed intake which is driven by a a disease that they're dealing with metritis whatever um that they may be uh so who brings all that data together then right so say you got robotic
(39:07) milking for example or even parlors that have indic individual cow uh milk recording so they have that daily milk production um you're tying that to feeding behaviors or rumination time and plus activity. So >> is a question on farms who brings this together on farms? >> Who brings it together or are or what's the technology that are how how are these data systems being brought together? So then we can particularly think fresh cows you can much more quickly identify those cows that need intervention. Mhm.
(39:36) >> So >> yeah, I mean there are some companies who are helping with that data integration and then um from a research perspective we we're working with commercial farms to integrate that data together and one of the things that we've observed is there's a lot of bad data that is produced on farm and if we just try to uh merge together raw data you get a lot of bad data that's all now merged together.
(40:04) So we're trying to do some quality controls before we integrate that data together in order to get at data sets that that are meaningful. Um but there are several companies that are integrating that data. I think um in Europe they're a little further ahead on that than we are here in the US. Um >> providers of dairy technology, dairy herd management, they're you know some of the leading dairy herd management software tools.
(40:28) They are already integrating uh many of the data streams generated on farms. robots integrate multiple data streams. Uh so it's happening. It's going to happen, you know, more and more things are going to get better, right? But you know, in my opinion, it's a given. I mean, without that data integration, it's going to be really hard to get the benefits of all this data.
(40:49) >> Yeah. And it has to be boiled down to actionable things as well, right? Especially when we think of it from a herd management standpoint, whether it's right, well, it's a herd person who's right dealing with the cow, they have all these technologies, they have all these data streams. They don't want to be filtering through things and looking at different, right, different sources of data, etc.
(41:12) They want an app on the phone that's going to basically, right, give them an alert and tell them what they need to do, right? Is is it to go look at that animal? Is it to have some kind of intervention and and do that, right? and and they can't be sifting through data to do that and and and that yeah so you need that integration and like Jackie says too we need to have and that's where the advanced modeling and everything comes into play there too the AI right um approaches because we need then to be able to really filter through be some of that data that's not going to
(41:43) be good right and and the the the models have to be able to predict that right and and say what is normal what's not normal what's good data bad data to be able to come out with whatever that prediction is or or whatever we're trying to achieve with that data stream or those data streams, right? Coming together.
(42:01) >> You guys mentioned bad data. What's the root cause of that? >> All sorts of uh in my in my personal experience working a lot with commercial farms as well as uh on our own research farms. Um sources of bad data are faulty uh sources of data such as sensors that fail and sensors do fail and they will continue to fail.
(42:25) You know dairy farm environment is a harsh environment for anything any piece of hardware. Uh so issues with the sensors that generate data uh issues with uh cow behavior related to uh the sensors. I mean a cow that kicks off the claw in the middle of milking and it doesn't get reattached. You get half of the milk that you expect and that that becomes a health alert saying that the cow is sick because she didn't make as much milk today.
(42:53) So there are elements of you know just you know how we manage cows you know where cows leave um as uh some of the cloud-based systems issues with internet connections >> internet electricity glitches >> power goes off on farms like >> yeah wind right for example right especially if we're trying to monitor with video right um and we're looking at feed or something like that right it could be things moving in front of the screen or >> yeah There's a whole host of things that >> cause issues.
(43:29) Software updates >> throw off completely sometimes. >> Yeah. >> And we still have a lot of data that is hand entered. So there's human error that is in there as well where you know you'll get a body weight that's 20,000 pounds. That's probably not right. >> Yeah. Even things simple as something as simple as you think a body weight measurement or a milkweight measurements.
(43:52) You think, "Oh, that's that's simple. It can do that." But yeah, those milk meters fail, right? That that they have to be maintained. They got to you got to repair them. Those things that just Yeah, there's problems that happen that the the communication from the the parlor to the the software. There's there can just be glitches there.
(44:11) So, there's Yeah, those things can easily it and you got to have somebody that's observant to see, hey, something's not right there. There's there's a mistake happening there. It it takes observation just catch those and and take care of them too. >> Dairy farms will have to have data managers in my opinion. You know, people that are doing nothing else and just looking at how data is generated helping with processing data and then how that data is converted into decision making tools and that data is used.
(44:42) I mean uh it's it's becoming overwhelming in a way for you know people that are dealing with cows all the time in whatever capacity right I mean to to deal with some of these things you know and as farms get larger and larger you know I see a data engineer data manager position within within a farm you know I think is the future >> that that brings up a a good point and maybe we can wrap up on this I'm not sure what we have for time but we could go on beyond this too but how do we need to train in a couple different ways. You
(45:13) know, the the personnel on the farm, but also thinking of us, you know, the the industry, allied industry that's around there, uh, our graduate students, our undergraduates that we're training, you know, for this future, too, is balancing that between being data managers, but also having cow sense, too, of of being able to look at a cow and and see something that that's not right there.
(45:37) So what what's the balance of that as we go into the the future? I would say we don't know the exact balance at this point. Uh other than what you just pointed out that those two skill sets are still going to be needed, right? Recognizing and I said earlier, right? Like we see automation in in manufacturing.
(46:00) Well, the problem with like if you're building a car or you're building a piece of technology in the home, right? Like it's not a living creature, right? and and and the behavior is not predictable, right? And and the physiology of the animal is not always predictable, right? We we think it is in some ways, but it's not. And so that's kind of the difference where we still need that human element of understanding the animals, right, to what you said and have those cow skills, so to speak, and then balance that off with, okay, we do also have this
(46:30) information we're collecting and what can we do with that? And so um I think that is an area that we are lacking so to speak to date as a lot of this starts to really ramp up like our programs we're just starting to scratch the surface. I know a lot of the animal science programs, dairy science programs are starting to think a little bit more about this and right uh courses on uh data analytics and modeling and things like that uh right that we traditionally haven't offered at least at the say the undergraduate level. Um and and and then
(47:04) even more advancements uh at the graduate level on those fronts too because we're seeing demand from uh from the industry as well for people with those skill sets and and so um yeah, we're we're going to see more and more demand from from us as academics as well to to yeah um promote that kind of uh learning at our at our institutions as uh as we move forward.
(47:29) I would say very similar things at the university levels. We're seeing an increase in digital a or precision a courses that I think will be helpful. And then integrating just some data science basics into dairy production makes a whole lot of sense. And then I think for industry, what we need to do for those of us that have extension appointments is um is put on some workshops for people that are in industry already to say like here is the new technology.
(47:58) Here's how you you may be seeing this and here's how it's integrating and explaining some of that some more to them because they're the ones that are out on farm. And if we can inform them of how to use this data better, how to uh understand the technology that's being implemented on farm, I think it could have a really big impact.
(48:18) No, I I agree and uh I I don't like to generalize but I would say that you know most of our students in animal science they tend to have more of the interest on the cow sense side of thing on on you know they they don't think a lot although it's changing rapidly right on on the data side of things but uh um you know that's where you know it's sometimes a little bit of a struggle to convince them that you know this is their future and this is what they should work on but I want to bring up even farm personnel right so you brought
(48:46) up some examples of that and I think with farm personnel you know especi at least here in the US as you know we have you know specific labor force especially on larger farms that you know uh may not have the the level of education and training that they need to deal with some of these very high tech or you know datadriven technologies.
(49:07) I think that is very important to help farm personnel feel comfortable with these technologies what what these technologies can do to help them to enhance them to help them with their dayto-day basis and then um it's quite interesting you know helping build trust uh on technologies for personnel you know uh a lot of times you know people you know have been doing things forever you know and and they are really good at what they do so now I mean it's is a is a shift on on how they work how they are supposed to work and it takes some times to help them you
(49:39) know trust these technologies and you know again how they can help them do better uh what they do. So there there's a lot to do on that on on farm personnel training and skills at development. It'll be interesting too as as this next generation is coming up too and that that what they've grown up with that we didn't grow up with and and how they're going to think about problem solving differently than what we do and and so say we to me it's critical that we continue the the farm experience, the animal experience so they can be exposed
(50:11) to that. So, you know, they get out and they see, okay, here's a a problem they can see on the farm, but then see how they're going to think about, well, here's how we could address that problem with just because they're they're coming up and and using technology in a different way than than what we learned how to use technology, too.
(50:27) >> Yeah, absolutely. >> Good deal. >> About done. >> Yes, I think so. We didn't have our beer. My ice cream is getting a [laughter] little soupy here. But >> which ice cream did you get? Was it from Cornell? >> I didn't because that line was so long. >> The Cornell line. >> Yeah. But the best ice cream. All the lines are really long.
(50:48) I ended up I budged in line to be able to get some so I could come over here. I I picked the uh NC State. All they had was vanilla, but what I had was really really good. So I can imagine everything else is really good. Did you say you were the overall program chair and you demanded your ice cream or >> I said I needed to go to do a podcast and [laughter] I needed some ice cream to >> I'm not so sure the beer would have gone well with your ice cream anyway.
(51:10) >> No, you would. Yeah, >> we'll have to get the beer here after after we're done. You know what in in wrapping up, what I'd like to do is just kind of get uh just one or two takeaways that you guys kind of summarize uh some some hard-hitting points for for the audience. uh typically, you know, look at our audience as dairy nutritionists, dairy farmers, uh academia students, and so what would those key points be that you'd like to, you know, put out there for him? And and maybe a little little tight segment for uh for us. Who'd like
(51:43) to start? We'll start with Trevor down there. >> We'll start with Trevor. He's we we already nominated him to start, so Oh, Julio never even introduced himself, but ah [laughter] it's true. I want to I use a lot of the time. Yeah. Do you want me to introduce myself now? >> Yeah, [laughter] you can introduce yourself now that now we're almost >> the wrap up.
(52:02) >> Our last call question is sponsored by Aminoure XM precision release methionine. The next generation in amino acid balancing. With Aminoure XM, you can save up to 5 cents per cow per day on your methane investment. Try it today and receive an additional 2.5 cents per cow per day savings with Balm's limited time rebate offer.
(52:25) Contact your BCM representative to learn more. Well, so I'm I'm a professor of animal science, the department of animal science at Cornell University and and uh I'm part of the dairy her management group there and I've been at Cornell for 13 years and my areas of expertise are reproduction and and health and and uh um even though I tradition so I started like a traditional reproductive biologies and reproductive management and economics uh uh training, I I migrated more and more into health and uh more and more into technology. So you
(52:58) know most of what we're doing these days is just trying to to work with technology contribute to you know the development of novel technologies and then understand how existing as well as novel technologies can be integrated into dairy herd management. So we're trying to bring these technologies to farms and you know see how they can actually be leveraged to improve performance to improve uh her management as well as economics which we also do a little bit of like try to put a dollar value on things. So in brief uh that's
(53:30) what we do and then uh my message for you know the future I I think that there's a bright future ahead with technology. I think that we are just scratching the surface of what it will be possible. We have a lot to learn. We we still have to go through quite a few frustrations. You know, there will be a lot of you know refinement to do a lot of things to uh continue to improve but but I think that technology is going to enhance dairy herd management and you know what our ladies on farm or what our cows can do in terms of their
(54:02) productivity, their health, their reproduction. Um so I think that you know just anyone not just producers all of us uh who are stakeholders of the industry must embrace technology and uh there's no way out of that it's just a matter of time >> yeah I think you summed it up pretty well there you did Trevor or Jackie you have anything to add to kind of uh key takeaway message >> I think that we just have to also remember that the farm is an operating farm and whatever technology we're trying to adopt has to solve a problem
(54:40) or it has to be helpful. I think um there's been you know a number of companies that have started that are no longer in business because they didn't keep that in mind. So I think that there's a lot of application that technology can have this huge impact. But I think we have to have farmer buy in that this is a problem that needs to be solved and technology can help with that problem.
(55:03) >> Yeah. Yeah. And I'd agree and I'd say that especially when we put on the lens that these problems or or things that we're trying to achieve with technology are there that are probably going to help the farmer and right and and the people managing farms. Uh what Julio mentioned that we're we're doing this to help the cows and then also and one that topic that we didn't get into heavily here is the consumer, right? and and those that are buying the product cuz at the end of the day right they're the ones that are uh driving the market so
(55:38) to speak because if the people are not purchasing the product uh then the the industry doesn't exist and and so they're a crucial component of this too and and I think we there is opportunity actually there uh to also use technology and advance technology to even improve our relationship with our consumers u of of milk products as So, >> good deal.
(56:03) Corwin, want to add anything to that? >> Yeah, I I think maybe just topping it off of what everybody said and and we talked about it at the end. It's it's the next generation of where they're going to take us in this and and we've seen this throughout, right, of of uh the next generation of dairy farmers. They're taking from, you know, what their parents did and and uh saying, "Okay, how can we move forward?" And and that's what we're looking at here.
(56:25) And, you know, from an academic side, we're thinking, how do we help prepare them? um in that journey. But yeah, they're they're going to be the ones saying looking at this and being creative and and thinking about here here's how we can can take this and implement this going into the future. So yeah, it's it's multiple aspects going into it.
(56:43) >> Yeah, good. This has been fun. Uh Corwin, you got a future in podcasting, I believe, if you know if this Dairy Professor stuff doesn't work out. [laughter] >> Started started my own podcast. I'm just Yeah, I'm not a podcaster. I don't know. I've never done it on my own. I think I think you did a fine job.
(57:00) >> Had some training wheels on today, but >> you got to have people that that uh can give good ideas. >> You guys were awesome. Yeah, they really were. You guys make it easy. I appreciate your your expertise and sharing it with us today. To our loyal listeners out there as always. Uh thank you for joining us today.
(57:16) We hope you learned something. Hope you had some fun. Hope to see you next time here at the Real Science Exchange where it's always happy hour and you're always among friends. We'd love to hear your comments or ideas for topics and guests. So, please reach out via email to an&h.marketingbalm.com with any suggestions and we'll work hard to add them to the schedule.
(57:38) Don't forget to leave a five-star rating on your way out. You can request your Real Science Exchange t-shirt in just a few easy steps. Just like or subscribe to the real science exchange and send us a screenshot along with your address and t-shirt size to an&h.marketing balm.com. Balm's real science lecture series of webinars continues with ruminant focused topics on the first Tuesday of every month.
(58:03) Monogastric focused topics on the second Tuesday of each month and quarterly topics for the companion animal segment. Visit balm.com/realscience to see the latest schedule and to register for upcoming webinars.