Feeding Management of Heifers: Carpenter, ISU; Weiss, OSU; Tebbe, Purina; Bradford, MSU - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-sqUUCqbNbY

Transcript:
(00:00) [Music] Good evening everyone and welcome to the real science exchange, the podcast where leading scientists and industry professionals meet over a few drinks to discuss the latest ideas and trends in animal nutrition. We've got an interesting uh one teed up for you guys here. It's called feeding management of heers and that's with Dr.
(00:26) Gail Carpenter from Iowa State University. Gail, welcome. this first time to your pub. Always like to see new faces here. Happy to be here. Yeah, super. What I'd like you to do is just kind of give everybody a some background on on who Gail is. That's a that's a very broad question. It is a broad question.
(00:44) So, I'm currently the uh state dairy specialist at Iowa State University. So, I'm a 60% extension appointment. Uh and then I have a 20% research appointment and technically it's 15% teaching, 5% service, but I just tell people I'm 60 2020. So, um, I get to work with our Iowa dairy producers.
(01:02) I get to do a little bit of research and I get to coach our dairy challenge team. Sounds like a lot of fun. I think I've seen you at the dairy challenge before, probably. Yep. The gentleman here to your left is uh Dr. Barry Bradford, Michigan State University. Got a Spartan in the house. Go. Um, go wide. So, Barry, give us just a little background.
(01:19) Probably don't need any introduction, but uh, tell us a little bit about yourself. Yeah. So, I've been back at Michigan State for about five years now after spending 13 years at Kansas State where I got to ride the coattails of Gail Carpenter while she did a whole bunch of work that I slapped my name on.
(01:37) So, uh yeah, uh half research half extension position at MSU now. Yeah, super great to have you here. And here to my right, got a couple buck guys. Oh, I Bill, why don't we start with you just real quick? I know you don't need an introduction, but tell the audience who you are. Uh, I was a professor at OSU or the OSU for about 35 years in dairy nutrition.
(02:00) Retired a few years ago and learning how to be more retired than I am now. Yeah, I know. It's kind of hard, right, to get keep getting pulled back into this, don't you? Yeah. Alex, not your first trip to the pub. Welcome back. I think the last time was in uh the last time, Bill, we were in Canada and we did a podcast. We got talking about poor Bill stuck in New York, New Jersey.
(02:24) And uh I'm like, "Huh, we ought to go get Bill." And we did. I still appreciate that very much. So anyway, Alex, tell us a little bit about yourself. What are you doing these days? Yeah, so I uh work for Pine Animal Nutrition. I do technical services and consulting on on dairies throughout Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, and Kentucky. Wow, that's a big territory.
(02:44) Yeah. Yeah. Good. Good for you. Yeah. I'm former grad student of uh Dr. Weiss himself. His last one that finally kicked him over the edge. You got to end on a high note. Yeah. Well, welcome. Glad to have you back, Alex. Um, so Gail, tell us a little bit about the presentation. [Music] New research is changing everything we thought we knew about choline's impact on the cow and her calf.
(03:16) And top scientists have a lot to say about it. They are presenting new research that supports choline as a required nutrient to optimize milk production. Choline as a required nutrient to support a healthy transition. choline as a required nutrient to improve calf health and growth and choline as a required nutrient to increase colostrum quantity.
(03:39) This new research is solidifying choline's role as a required nutrient for essentially every cow, regardless of health status, milk production level, or body condition score. Learn more about the science that is changing the game and the choline source that is making it happen.
(03:58) Reassure Precision Release Choline from Balm. Visit balm.com/scientists say to learn more. [Music] Yeah. So, I'm going to be talking about um some basically distilling some of the work we've been doing uh educating our dairy producers about raising heers. Uh so we got some funding a couple years ago uh from extension risk management uh to talk about heer development and do some work with our producers on heer development around the state.
(04:33) Uh and that involved going out to dairies and helping them benchmark um their heer growth and development uh as well as uh doing some doing some uh live sessions and doing some some outreach and education too. So, um, taking some of that messaging that we did as part of that project and distilling it down into some of the, uh, into some of the key key points that we've been trying to lead our dairy producers to.
(05:00) Um, looking at, uh, optimizing heer development, uh, starting with, uh, reducing morbidity and mortality, uh, and then, um, uh, getting them bred in a timely way so that we are keeping a a tight age at first cving regardless of what uh, we think an optimum age of first cving is.
(05:17) So, uh, I don't think we're going to see anything particularly earthshattering in my presentation, but, uh, the fact that we kind of keep having to have some of these conversations shows that, um, they're still important. Okay. Tell me about the research and what did you find out? So, we didn't, this was not actually a research project. It was an extension project. Got it. Uh, so we didn't, we mostly worked with pretty small herds.
(05:35) Uh, and I at one point had thought maybe we'll get a critical mass and we'll be able to do some cool defined small. Uh, pretty okay. Okay. I think our smallest farm was probably 50 cows. Got it. Um but we had a couple like a couple a couple hundred cow dairies, right? Um and uh so they tended to be on the smaller smaller side.
(05:57) And uh uh so um I think one of the things that we found a lot of a lot of what I'm going to talk about is mostly anecdotal, right? And and in conversations that we had to to have with producers. And uh one of the messages that we kind of kept coming back to was making sure that you're prioritizing uh heat detection and conception in these heers.
(06:15) Uh heers tend to be, you know, they're they're down the road. Uh you know, they're they're around the corner. Might not necessarily be, you know, you're milking your cows twice a day. You probably have maybe activity monitors. Even if you don't, uh you're at least having those multiple touch points with your lactating cows throughout the day, and they're the ones that are actually paying the bills right now, right? whereas heers are going to pay the bills in a few years uh or in a couple years. And so those lactating cows really tend to be top of mind. And
(06:40) especially if you're a small farm that maybe you're uh working a lot as a family producer, might not have all the employees, heers make their way to the bottom of the list. And so getting semen into those heers in a timely way, making sure that we're investing uh in heat detection, whether that's using uh cedar sync protocol or whether that's actually, you know, monitoring heers for heat, sticking to the protocols that we have really helps to uh bring down that variation in age at first. So, so what are the gaps besides breeding? That was like a big one you
(07:10) you pointed to. Yeah, that's a that's I think a lowhanging fruit on several of the farms that we worked with. Uh, also, uh, things that we can talk about is just general recordkeeping. Um, that tends to be another thing that, you know, maybe doesn't make its way to the top of the list.
(07:28) And, uh, one of the things we talk about, uh, when when I'm presenting this to producers is, you know, when I have a New Year's resolution, I love used to, I try not to do this anymore, but new year, you set a New Year's resolution. And once you set one, you're going to set like I'm going to be a completely changed different person by the end of the year.
(07:47) I'm going to be so much like because I'm going to run three miles every day and I'm going to uh read a book every week and all these things that are going to, you know, make me make me better. Uh and then you get two weeks in and you're like, well, I'm not doing any of that. And then you kind of give up, right? So, so if we think of recordkeeping as kind of like that New Year's resolution, starting small, starting with something that's manageable for you, uh, and starting with something that is, you know, specific enough and detailed enough that you or your consultant can take advantage of some of that data collection, but not so detailed or so broad or so involved that you're just
(08:16) not going to do it. It's better to do something at a manageable level uh and actually accomplish it than to than to go way overboard and and and not be able to keep up with it. Yeah. Do you see some of these gaps a little more prevalent on some of these smaller dairies as opposed to larger dairies? I think that Well, I don't know if anybody's exempt from this, right? Um and I, you know, have dealt with a couple dairies. It's like, oh yeah, we write that down and it's in a just desk drawer somewhere, right? And so I always encourage those those producers to like,
(08:47) hey, like why don't we talk to some of your consultants or your extension specialists and see if we can help you get that put in and and I always say, you know, your nutritionist would really love this information, right? You're collecting it and and let's just make sure that it can get into the hands of somebody who can use it. So yeah. Yeah,
(09:05) good point. Yeah. Yeah. So what what's the most if you can only do one record, what what's the most important for heers? Uh well, birth date, death date. Um, hopefully not death date, but um, obviously our big dates need to be taken care of. I would really like to see uh, cving included. Um, I love the idea of uh, a calf birth certificate. You may have seen those. you know, it's a it's a little one sheeter and that travels with the calf as she goes through that pre-weening phase.
(09:33) And writing down things like like vaccinations, date of dehorning, um uh any treatments that she needed, uh birth weight, weaning weight, I know you said one and I gave you like 10. Um, but in addition to all of the dates, I think the things that are really important is that that initial birth weight, that weaning weight, if we can get it, um, and and any treatment records that we have.
(10:01) So, and there's ways that we can do that to kind of incorporate it into um, into our existing routines. Um, and that whole idea, especially with individually housed calves, if you have, especially if they're indoors, too, little clipboard that goes on the front of that calves pen is can be just a really helpful, easy way to accomplish that. Yeah, Alex, you're bellyto belly with a lot of dairymen out there.
(10:19) Is any of this ringing true? Yeah, I would agree completely, especially with the value of today's heers and uh guys wanting to run lower coal rates and tighter heer numbers. It's really important that we really hone in on the heers that we're producing that are going to enter in the herd if we are putting such a value on on our heer population.
(10:41) So, I think those are are important things that we need to be looking at constantly and it starts with, as Gail mentioned, good records. Yeah. And you find out a gap not having a lot of good records out there. Yeah, definitely. It can be a challenge. I think a lot of times we tend when we're talking about heer economics and reducing how much or optimizing how much we spend on our heers, we tend to focus on that age at first cving a lot of times, right? like if we're you know if we can lower that age at first cving to 20 from 24 to 23 like how much we save
(11:10) per heer and we forget first of all you know that's an investment potentially uh but also uh there's there's so many other places along the way where we need to focus too.
(11:28) So, if you're making a bunch of calves that don't even make it to first breeding that or that aren't getting bred or that aren't cving in, if you're having a lot of heer morbidity in that pre-cing phase, those are all the lowhanging fruit that we can really focus on to make sure we're making quality heers. Yeah. Can you talk a little bit about uh measuring and tracking health events because I know that health events at when they're calves will translate a lot of times into performance as an adult animal. Talk a little bit about that. That's true. Yeah.
(11:53) Yeah, we uh we actually did a study um this isn't in uh replacement heers. This was a study we did in beef on dairy cavs um that we I had a master student who graduated last summer. She did the pre-weening phase and we finally um have the finishing data on all of these steers that we ran through.
(12:12) Um and we did some nutritional things uh pre-cing. Uh we gave them two different levels of starch and their starter and then post cving they went on two different diets. So we had like a 2 by two there with different nutritional interventions. Um and we found some some some neat stuff, but what we found was um health actually had a very large impact too.
(12:30) So any calf that had two or more um or any steer who had two or more respiratory events uh they had a lower carcass weight and a lower return on investment. So, um, yeah, we've seen and there's there's data out there on BRD on, you know, the these respiratory events or, you know, if they're starting off on the wrong foot, uh, that has a real economic impact. Yeah. Especially it damages the lungs.
(12:54) It would say respiratory is more important than, uh, maybe gastrointestinal uh, issues. Well, dehydration is obviously going to be a big problem for calves, right? If we have dehydrated calves, we're not going to have that's going to be a big killer of calves, too. Um, so if we're looking at gastrointestinal, you have that risk of dehydration, right? Um, and so we want to make sure that we're that we're monitoring that, but a lot of the data on the long-term impacts does come from that respiratory pneumonia.
(13:21) Want to get Barry, you got an opportunity to get in here. I'm curious, Gail, have you seen people implementing the lung ultrasounding in in the process? Obviously, you have to make more heers if you want to give yourself room to to remove some, but do you see people implementing that? We don't have a um h that's a great question.
(13:39) Uh we don't have a ton of producers that are doing that. I'm curious if Alex if you're seeing any a lot of that. It does tend to be some of our our larger farms that do kind of lean onto the lung ultrasound thing. I think there's a ton of potential to it. Um for some of those subclinical uh events that we don't even know that we're having, right? Um but are you seeing a lot of farms that are um it really varies. I think it's been used as a tool as like a benchmarking system that different farms have had.
(14:04) um versus a troubleshooting thing. Kind of like uh benchmarking your growth throughout the different stages that we'll go in and and check some lung scores and see how we're doing. Um and monitoring that throughout the year. Uh isn't as as popular as okay, here's where we're at. Here's how we compare to some other farms. Do we have a problem? Title is feeding management.
(14:28) Talk to me about that. What kind of things you're going to share during the presentation? Uh well, the title that that I ended up with ended up being I I I kind of lightened out from that, which probably isn't too surprising, but uh feeding management. We're going to talk some some pretty basic uh basic concepts there.
(14:46) Not make making sure your heers aren't overconditioned uh and making sure you're getting good growth out of them. Uh and that come there's so many different ways to manage heers well and so many different ways to make mistakes. But I think a lot of that comes down to are we managing the body condition? uh and are we managing their growth at the same time and kind of finding those two things in balance. So you'll hear about precision feeding.
(15:10) Um we used to call it limit feeding, but that's not that not the kosher term to use anymore. So precision feeding these dairy heers uh and maybe not feeding them to ad liib versus potentially using some a higher forage diets uh and just feeding that bulky diet um that's going to fill them up while not overconditioning them or giving them too many calories there.
(15:29) Uh so we're going to talk about some some generally um some concepts around feeding management with that. Uh and then also the importance of mature body weight uh and understanding what your mature body weight is of your herd. Uh which is something that we um as part of our extension outreach were helping helping producers uh measure on their own um and and find that for their herd.
(15:50) How common is precision feeding out to heers? I'm not seeing it very much at least not where we are. Yeah, I see it very rarely anymore. I mean, the management side of it is so much more difficult than it is in a conventional and and things coming around more so like double cropping where we have an abundance amount of of forage that we can feed those animals. You just don't see it as much anymore, at least in the Midwest.
(16:13) Yeah. And that's we talk I'm going to talk a little bit about using alternative forages, too. And sometimes when you're doing like you said double cropping cover crops like a lot of times we'll get a lot of biomass on forages that aren't super high quality.
(16:31) Uh and so potentially you know that might be an opportunity to feed it to heers assuming that we're not you know loading them up with micotoxins that could potentially hurt reproduction. Um kind of getting some of those bulky forages into heer diets can be a a really good solution. Is the goal still 24 22 to 24 months or has that changed? It really depends on who you talk to.
(16:51) Uh I think okay you it's it depends right we're an extension we say it depends um so that two to 22 to 24 months I think is still a good goal for a lot of farms but really what's more important is not the age itself but the body weight right so 22 months can be too young for some herds if you're not getting good growth and they're not hitting that target uh percent mature body weight at cving that can be too young um alternatively 24 months might be too old for some herds it really depends on your heer management and when you're hitting uh
(17:20) when you're hitting those growth targets. For for someone who doesn't know much about heers, what's the percent of mature weight? Thank you. Uh 75 to 80% uh would be the the one that's typically typically thrown around there. Yep. Yep. I've seen herds that were averaging under 21 months. Yes. And that bothered me like they didn't have any body weight data, but I'm pretty sure that wasn't optimal.
(17:42) Do you agree? Probably. Yeah. Yeah. I think at least and I haven't been around in in the this uh well I haven't been around as long as I'm trying to say this without saying some people are old in my you know in my time it seems like uh there's been you know we saw a lot like you know 5 10 years ago about well age at first cabing is way too old we need to lower that and we have a tendency to think okay if you know if if this is too old and a little bit younger is better then much younger must be even better right and so we kind of keep pulling I I think we see that in a lot
(18:21) of things not just heers but we tend to like inflammation's a good example of that well if some inflammation is bad then maybe we want to eliminate it right and usually that's not the solution usually it's somewhere in the middle ground there um and so I think that it does seem like for a while there was this push just younger younger younger cuz okay every day you're not spending feeding that heer and she's not milking, you're, you know, you're saving that money, but it is an investment, right? So, that is the foundation of your herd. You want to make sure she she's successful and it doesn't really make sense to breed her and she calves in at
(18:55) 21 months, but then you call her for low milk production when she just didn't have the opportunity to be able to perform, right? So, um it is finding that middle ground and I think at a certain point you're just not going to have like physiological maturity too, right? So, right. And she's going to have to catch up anyway.
(19:13) She's just going to expend those or take those groceries in anyway. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Gil, I had a question for you. Um, you know, one of the questions I get often times on some of these farms is, do we bring back the heers home and homegrown heers or do we move to a custom razor? any kind of questions that you feel would be important when you're deciding to do custom or a a homegrown heer and what resources are out there to make that decision. Penn State actually has a lot of great resources on custom rearing dairy heers. Um I hate to, you know, kick it outside
(19:49) of our uh our our own home court, but uh but they do that. But the Penn State Extension website has a lot of great resources on that. We actually in our own uh extension programming we we li rely on some of the work that they've done there quite a bit.
(20:07) Um but I think yeah so one of the things to consider is do you have the space and the and the resources and be reasonable and honest with yourself right kind of like the goal setting in the New Year's resolutions. You want to make sure that you're you want to make sure that you're being honest with yourself about what your capacity is, right? Um and and making sure that your facilities are appropriate size for the numbers of he number of heers that you have.
(20:30) Um grazing heers can be a can be a fantastic option. Grazing heers can be a great way to get good growth out of heers. Um but grazing is not the same as throwing them out on the dry lot and expecting them to do okay, right? like grazing done well is actually very intentional.
(20:50) Um, and so I I bring that up as an example of thinking like, okay, maybe we can expand our facility, not expand our facility, but we can expand the number of heers we have by grazing some of them and keeping them at home. But really, you need to be sure that you have the capacity to be able to graze, right? Uh, so so a good starting question is going to be looking at your own resources and your own capacity, whether that's facilities or labor, and looking at that in balance with the number of heers you have.
(21:14) Um, but working with uh custom heer growers um making sure those animals are getting uh they're getting uh bred at the right size uh size and age is important in breeding. Um and and keeping an eye on those numbers, those conception rates and and looking at those heers when they're coming back and making sure that you're still having uh that that your grower is still meeting the expectations that you have.
(21:37) Um, and like so many things in this life, a lot of that comes back to good communication, uh, and making sure that we're having open and honest conversations. You know, I understand, you know, uh, taking a look at your own operation, but perfect world, you think people ought to be raising their own heers and I kind of think back, never raised any heers myself, but my kids, I'd rather raise my kids than somebody else raise their my kids, right? And so, it just seems natural to me that then nobody's going to do it the way I'm going to do it. Well, I know.
(22:02) I hate to say should because that would put some heer growers out of business that are doing a good job. We're not talking bad about those guys. Y I know we had this in at our university dairy. We had some of these discussions as well because we actually send our heers to a grower now.
(22:19) Um and it was really hard for me personally to accept because I like the idea. You know, we're a we're a teaching institution and kind of like you're you know, you don't want to offload your kids, you don't want to offload your heers. And um so it it was kind of hard for me to accept that because I wanted I wanted to do it right.
(22:35) I wanted to, you know, have it there for our students to be able to observe and to see. Um and it just got to a point where it just wasn't feasible for us. Um that was mostly a windstorm that knocked over one of the heer barns. But I think some of it becomes you end up with a a bottleneck somewhere, right? You have a land base or whatever.
(22:54) And and I think this is what's driven a lot of a is well we're gonna specialize in one thing and take the resources we have and be really really good at milking cows right in multi-state operations is even like oh we're just going to cav on one site for the same logic right so there's downsides but I think there's some logic to it too yeah we were kind of having the same conversation in the last uh uh podcast we were talking about beef on dairy and should you raise your your beef calves right and and so I guess the same is true here is you know what's your core competency. Yeah. Yeah. And uh
(23:23) yeah, I guess the next question I think I know the answer, but I'll ask it anyway. So, do you raise your heers? If you got if you got some facilities, you raise your heers, you raise your your uh your beef calves. We actually have a lot of uh producers that are doing that. We just did a survey of our dairy producers in Iowa.
(23:42) Um and we found the most the two most common uh options were selling them at birth or finishing them out. There's not a whole lot of people doing the in between. Um and uh and and mostly it was like almost 60% of them said they're just selling them at birth. Um at least of the people who responded to our survey.
(23:58) But uh if you have the again facilities and knowledge finishing out steers and raising milk and cows are not the same. Uh and uh if you can utilize your your knowledge and your resources. I know if I'm using Iowa as an example, we have a really great a lot of a lot of great resources about um uh beef development and and the beef industry.
(24:23) And so if you have those resources available to you and and again going back to this whole idea of core competencies, what you can what you know you can do well, um it can make a lot of sense. So, but it's also hard to you know, if you can get 800 bucks or a,000 bucks a pop for a wet calf, it's hard to turn that down, too. It really is. Yeah,
(24:41) for sure. Yeah. I'm kind of kind of wondering um I'm formulating a question here now. I got one. Yeah, go for it. Um you talk a bit about age more than a bit, but aged first cving is a good mean better than you know you can have a good mean with huge variation. That is a that is something I'm going to talk about. Yeah. Okay.
(25:01) So, can you give us a pre prelude? Um you need both. Yeah, you need both uh good mean and good variation. It's like you watched my talk already. uh you need good like I did read your papers. Yeah, that's fair. Uh so you need you need to get that average right but also we want to reduce the variation we have around that average.
(25:18) Uh and we have found again this is anecdotal but with the herds some of the herds we've worked with a lot of that comes back to having reducing that variation in the age that they're being bred. Uh and so making sure that we're breeding them close to around the same time that can come from. So I want to caveat that though. um we should be breeding them on age and size.
(25:38) So if you have a heer that's not grown enough yet um or if you want to wait a cycle or two to make sure that she's uh she's more mature uh more likely to be successful, that can be done uh if you have some smaller heers that you want to that you want to get a little bit more growth out of um in the short term, right? So if you're making a decision, you have heers in front of you today that you're deciding whether or not to breed, they have to have met, you know, the age, but they also have need to have met the
(26:05) size. If you're finding that you have consistently a lot of variation and not all heers are reaching the size that you want at the right age, then it's time to have that conversation with your nutritionist and maybe even your veterinarian too um to to go back and say, "Okay, what is causing this variation?" Um is it health issues pre-cing? Are we getting a lot of those like poor doers because they're not thrifty? Um, is it a nutrition issue? Is it an overstocking issue? Is it a you know, there's a whole bunch of things
(26:33) that could lead into that? But, um, but yeah, in the short term, uh, when you're when you have the heers in front of you that you're trying to make the that decision today, uh, it's age and size. What kind of is there a the be say the best producers, what kind of variation would they see in age at first cing? I don't know if I have a good answer to that question. uh you know what it's not when you see it.
(26:56) Uh and um so probably within uh a month on either side um of of that and you see a nice little you know normal distribution um but but probably within a month of your of your mean would be would be good. So got a he shortage going on right now. Do you see people changing their practices to try to rush these heers into into production? And and and then is there anything that we should do differently because we got an effort shortage? We see a lot of people uh wondering what to do as a result of their heer shortage. Uh and I think uh I I don't know if I've worked with a bunch of
(27:34) people who are uh rushing. Um I don't think I've seen too much of that. And I'd be curious, Alex, if your if your experience lines up with that as well. Um, but uh but but the breeding decisions are certainly pe something that people are thinking a lot about right now. Uh and conversations that we're having that we don't want to short uh your future.
(27:59) Um but certainly we want people to be able to take advantage of of the market prices that we have at the moment. And so, uh, we've been we've been kind of coaching people like, okay, we can tighten this up potentially. Usually we try to hold a heer surplus, uh, and maybe we reduce that surplus a little bit and we're not pushing for quite as much of a surplus as we were before.
(28:19) Um, but still not getting to the point like don't expect the world to suddenly be perfect in that heer rearing, right? that you're, you know, making exactly the right number of heers that you need and expect expect you to not have uh issues with calling or mortality or morbidity and and not having any problems at all. Um that doesn't really happen overnight.
(28:43) So yeah, so I mean it's been a breeding changes for sure on farms, you know, utilizing more sex versus beef if you're growing herd or you don't have enough heers. Um, I have seen a lot of guys that uh are overproducing heers start to cabbage on to the potential profits of selling some of those extra heers.
(29:04) But eventually that's going to end at some point too, I think. Um, but I haven't seen a whole lot of guys start to jump on the bandwagon of purposely producing heers to make a profit out of it. And I think that's going on not happening for two reasons. Um, number one, uh, that's a long-term gamble, right? We're talking two years versus the beef side, 13 to 14 months if you would go that route.
(29:28) Um, the other aspect is because of how feed prices change, the es and flows in the market, um, not really having a really good projection of how much it's going to cost you to raise that heer um, to term I think has has held back some of those those uh, producers trying to find that as like a niche market. But it may come. It may come. Yeah. You know, a related topic.
(29:52) I I've heard tell that there's some people out there thinking about milking some of those beef cross uh heers. Have Have you guys heard of that or seen that happening? Not on my farm. Not really. No. I've heard of some accidental beef crosses that we don't they end up in the in the milking stream, but uh I don't think there's a lot of intentionality around that. Just rumors, I guess. Then Alex is like, I wouldn't admit it if I saw that.
(30:15) Yeah. I don't I don't want those, you know, those cows to bring down my averages. When there's one on the ground, it's hard to tell the difference between a beef cross and a and a jersey cross. So, uh yeah, I think sometimes they they might accidentally find their way up there.
(30:33) And but yeah, I we've had some people question maybe going the other way and saying, should we start uh should we start producing beef calves from from dairy crosses like for the beef stream? But I'm not seeing a whole lot of uptake on it's mostly just questions, right? Questions and rumors and not seeing a whole lot of actual like uptake on any of that.
(30:50) So, yeah. All right. Interesting. Any other key points from your presentation that we need to cover? I don't think so. Just I think the main point that I want to drive home is that we want to pay attention to our heers. We really put a lot of emphasis on that pre-weening phase when it comes to calves and we put a lot of emphasis on what we do with them once they c back in. Um, but we have to make sure that we're raising heers well in between weaning and and that cving too.
(31:15) Yep. Well, that's a nice wrap up. I think I'll ask the other three gentlemen as well to to provide their uh uh final comments. Uh Barry, do you got any things you want to wrap up here? Tonight's last call question is brought to you by Nitrusher Precision Release Nitrogen. Nitrusher delivers a complete TMR for the rin microbiome, helping you feed the microbes that feed your cows.
(31:38) To learn more about maximizing microbial protein output while reducing your carbon footprint, visit balcom.com/nitroshure. Well, I think just focusing on um age of first cving and then sort of back calculating from there. How do we need to manage this whole process including I think one of the the biggest things that I've been surprised how many farms lack is just do you have good enough records to at least know the death rate annually on your calves? Because if you don't know that, you don't know how many heers need to produce. And
(32:09) for another thing, you should just be keeping records that you can go back and analyze to try to solve that problem, right? So that's a good starting point for a lot of farms. Perfect. Alex, you have any uh practical advice for us? Yeah, I would uh echo those comments, but also the push to have better heer record numbers that uh you know as you are team approach on these dairies and you're trying to make decisions, you have things that you're collecting to make decisions in because as we know you can't manage what we don't measure. So I think that's that's
(32:39) critical and as we continue to ride you know more lean heer numbers that becomes even more critical that every single heer that we're having enter the herd is the right size and bred at the right time to optimize her milk production for the next several years. Yeah. Excellent. Bill, any words of wisdom? No, but I'll say something.
(33:05) I think what you kept saying is this is an investment now and that to me it's we always looked at it as a cost and it's it's you kept emphasizing investment which means sometimes spending money is is worth it and I think that's a very important concept to keep bringing on these nonprou what I call nonproductive non income earning units. Yep. Yep. Bill, you sell yourself short. That was an excellent summary. Thank you.
(33:30) All right, folks. This has been a fun one. Appreciate you guys spending some time with us here to our loyal audience. As always, thank you for joining us here at the Real Science Exchange where it's always happy hour and you're always among friends. We'd love to hear your comments or ideas for topics and guests.
(33:47) So, please reach out via email to an&h.marketing balm.com with any suggestions and we'll work hard to add them to the schedule. Don't forget to leave a fivestar rating on your way out. You can request your Real Science Exchange t-shirt in just a few easy steps. Just like or subscribe to the Real Science Exchange and send us a screenshot along with your address and t-shirt size to an&h.
(34:11) marketing balm.com. Balm's real science lecture series of webinars continues with ruminant focused topics on the first Tuesday of every month, monogastric focused topics on the second Tuesday of each month, and quarterly topics for the companion animal segment. Visit alchem.com/realscience to see the latest schedule and to register for upcoming webinars.