Feeding Cows for 1 Ton of Milk Components and 20000 kg of Milk per Year - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wpV03BJP3Ig

Transcript:
(00:06) All right, keeping on the theme of amino acids, right? You guys met the co-authors. We did some of this. I'm going to do something different here. One of the things um this talk has an interesting origin mostly in Europe. It's about three years old, but I've iterated on it, you know. And the the the point about this talk was somebody invited me over here to talk about 20,000 kilo cows.
(00:32) And they thought when I came I would be talking it about theoretical things, right? And I just went around the neighborhood and brought some of my neighbors along, right? So I'm going to talk about some cows, right? But but but this is a different way of saying hey you know pregnancy is a requirement for milk yield and every unit of semen generally results in more genetically superior offspring sounds really simple to say it that way but I think we grossly underestimate the value of that calf right today as especially today with
(01:01) genomics to the point where I've started to engage our geneticists again to ask them you know when do we decide we have a new genotype in a cow Right? Because if we were feeding pigs, right, every so often we have a new genotype. We have to update their amino acid requirements to meet their protein synthetic capacity.
(01:23) I call Kurt Vantassel who is one of the scientists responsible for genomic analysis. I say, Kurt, this is how we rederive the amino acid requirements. When do we get a new genotype and when do we know how to do it again? And he laughed and he says, well, unlike pigs, we're constant. He said, "So with genomic analysis today, probably every calf is a new genotype.
(01:48) How's that?" Right? Which means the amino acid values I showed you this morning, which we derived 10 years ago, are probably out of date because that's what he said. He says, "You got to do it again." Right? So that's my perspective. When I stand up here and talk to you guys, I'm already thinking about our next iteration on and what does that mean? All right? And we don't we don't always manage that interaction as proactively as we should.
(02:16) Sometimes some of our management and passive uh is passive and we don't, you know, we're kind of like, oh, we're just going to do this, right? I I use I always use mature body size as a reference for that, right? If you go I always like walking into old Tai stall barns in the US, right? And the stalls are this long, right? And the cows used to fit in those stalls.
(02:38) And now if you put a cow in that stall, you need another stall the same size, right, to to fit that cow. Well, how did that change? Why did that change? Well, it's the unintended consequence of selecting for milk, right? The machine gets bigger if you wanted to do more work, right? But again, we've we've approached that passively sometimes, right? But what happens to the requirements as that happens? Well, they all grow up, right? So [snorts] that's part of the process.
(03:02) So where are we at, right, on genetic capacity? And I think this this this I I have this front and center in my head as I think about this all the time. Um in fact I was reading a paper in the back there uh between talks uh about how we think about this and what it means for milk composition.
(03:26) Um but if you you know where you and you know this seems like a really you know why would we talk about this? Well the lower bounds I'll show you why here in a minute. The lower bounds is about 11,000 kilos. upper bounds is about 35,000 kilos, right? So, it says, hey, you know, and this is 2010, and I know it's higher now, but it said our genetic potential, you know, we're at the bottom about 11,000, but it's somewhere around 35,000 kilos.
(03:52) But we have cows that have told us that's possible, right? Which is even more fascinating, right? And the cow that just beat these guys as a Wisconsin cow. was an embryo. Got shipped to Japan. She made I have to do this in pounds. She made 86,000 pounds of milk. How's that? She made water, but she made 86,000 pounds of milk.
(04:15) I was 10 miles from her this summer, and I didn't have time to go see the cow. We were hoping the dairy farmer would come to a meeting we were having, but we didn't get there. But what's interesting, and this is another thing I think we have to consider, right? Here's two world record cows.
(04:32) If you looked at their predicted transmitting ability, it was pretty average. If you looked at their estimating breeding values, they were pretty average, right? So, if you look at them genetically, these were what? Average cows. You know, these were not the top of the herd. This is not the top of the Holene breed. These are just average cows.
(04:54) Which is informative to me because the question becomes, when were they told it was okay to do this? in and what did they what did we communicate to them? Because they essentially started their lactation, they pushed the gas pedal all the way to the floor and they never took the foot off the gas pedal, right? They just ran and the mammary gland and the liver and the brain all said just keep going, right? There was no throttling back on anything which leads to you know so if you do if you want to know what the upper level is now you take their milk
(05:28) production and you essentially double it right which means the upper bounds for either of these cows the upper bounds in the breeds now would be around 70,000 kilos and the lower bounds would be what they just a little bit above what they produced. How's that? Well, that'll make you think. Makes me think, right, that we have cows walking around that can do this.
(05:56) And and the way I was taught or trained by some of the geneticists was to think it was to think differently. They they and some of the geneticists, these guys don't always talk this way, right? But one of the ways I think about this is we walk into a herd and that calf is born and it has this potential, right? But then everything we do along the way just keeps doing what? detracting from their ability to make milk. And that starts at conception.
(06:22) We know that's true as a calf, right? The more times the sicker that calf gets, what happens to her production capacity? Every time we treat her with an antibiotic, what happens? She loses milk potential, right? So, it's programmed all along the way. Which means if we want to increase our productivity, where do we have to start? The moment they hit the ground, right? It is a system and you've got to reinforce this genetic capacity and tell them, hey, all along the way here, you're going to you're going to be able
(06:53) to perform this way. It's a completely different we we think about that, but we don't act it. That's my point about the management being passive, right? You know, I I make a joke in the US about you have these high genetic merit calves and you you tell your 5-year-old to go take the bucket of milk over and feed it, right? That's you got it fed, but probably not as effectively as you should have, right? But it also tells you, hey, these cows are going places um that we don't always think about, you know. So based on John
(07:24) Cole and some work from Chad Decau, you know, on average the gen capacity for holiness is about 34,000. Um in Cuga County where I live in central New York, we have cows peaking between 89 and 97 kilos. That's greater than 20,000 kilograms. Okay. So there, this 20,000 kilo cow is is not an anomaly to us anymore.
(07:48) We've got these cows in commercial herds, you know, just north of campus, right? I think there's a lot of cows in those herds. And I just I just said that I made this point, you know, what are we doing and when that either detracts from or fails to turn on that ability and when is it communicated to the animal? I find that if I was somebody asked me the other day, I'm not that old, but I guess I'm old enough, right? And somebody said, "Well, if you if you had your career to start over again, what would you do?" [laughter]
(08:16) Um, this question will always haunt me, right? Because it says we can program these things, right? Whether it's genetics or epigenetics. So, I think that's that's where I'd spend time, right? So, just just if you guys have never been there, um, when I talk about Cuga County, that's here. There's where I live. Niagara Falls is there and New York City is down here. All right.
(08:44) So, just to give you some reference, I have to up this number. I keep forgetting to update that slide. We're about 65,000 cows in the county. We are now that county is number one in New York for dairy. And I said there's cows in that county peing 80 to 90 kilos of milk or better. That's that 20,000 kilos a year, right? Uh, so I brought some of those cows along. Here's one of them.
(09:11) Interesting things about these cows, right? And and it it's interesting to me because there's a lot of people that would say these cows are going to die quickly, right? Because they're making so much milk. And they're just the opposite of that. They got to grow up to be able to do what? Make that much milk, right? And I think there's, you know, so this is uh 6028 at a dairy. She's fourth lactation.
(09:36) She didn't quite make 20,000. 186, 789 fat, 622. She's at in 367 days, she averaged 50.8 kilograms a day, right? So she's doing pretty well. But this is one of the things I think is interesting, right? So as um and this is in pounds, you know, she didn't make a lot of milk. She cabbed at 22 months, made 21,000 pounds of milk in the first lactation.
(09:59) Cabbed pretty pretty quickly after that. Had a normal lactation, right? They got bred back too fast actually. 56 days dry, 54 44 days dry, 53 days dry, 53 days dry. If you look at these cows in these well-managed herds, they have normal, they get pregnant, right? I guess the point I'm trying to make is this high level production doesn't stop them from getting pregnant, right? So that's the other paradigm that we all had to get over.
(10:26) Just means we have to work harder to get semen in a cow when she's really in heat, right? So obsync collars, the collars are working pretty well. There's a bunch of dairies now in New York that are using the collars effectively not giving obscync shots, right? Very little veterinary intervention, [laughter] hardly any.
(10:46) Right? You just, you know, cave in, as long as she's not sick, go. Right? So here's one gal uh 5973 18 about 19,782 356 days of lactation average 53 kilos a day same kind of thing right longer lactations but they've got to be older more mature cows to do that peaked at 83 kilos 6389 21,000 just over 21,000 kilos of milk 973 of fat 750 of protein average 53 kilos for the lactation same same kind of thing Right.
(11:22) She was she and and and notice this, right? She caved at 22 months, made made um over 14,000 kilograms in the first lactation. Right? The other thing we've learned is that in these best performing herds, they're not CVing at older ages. They're all CVing in that 22 to 23 months range. Right? We're learning that the younger heers are the best performing heers and they have the greatest herd life.
(11:47) It's antithetical to most of the stuff that has been written over time, but that's that's where we're at, right? But again, they have to be more mature cows. Um, this girl, 4291, third lactation, 23,936, 757, 56 kilos a day, 4% fat, 323 protein. I put that up there just to make the point that she's not making water, right? It's not really high high fat, but she's still she's still putting it out.
(12:15) And we keep learning about these cows. You know, I can tell you that in a couple of the herds, they they have good herd managers. They'll pay attention. If I walk into one of those barns, they they they will put one of these cows is having a bad day and just watching her, they'll move her into a fresh cow pen for a day, give her a day just by herself, kind of get back to speed, and then put her back out, right? Because she's making so much milk, they can't afford to lose her, right? But they're going to give her a a day in the spa necess, you know, if you want to think
(12:44) about it that way. And you know, but you know, they're 17 18 2700 18 200 2,000 cow herds, right? 4,000 cow herds. So there's a little bit of management intensity here to keep these cows going. But it's it's not extreme, but they have learned that if they want to keep these cows around, they do have to pay attention to them.
(13:05) Right. One more. You know, just about 20,52 kilos a day. 37 311, right? Again, they get pregnant, have normal lactation curves and everything else, right? This is a barn, right? Why do I show this? This is one of the barns, right? What do we see? We got lots of feed. We got some headlocks. This is a three row barn, four row barn, two row barn.
(13:37) What do we got? Two rows on this side, two rows on this side. What are we not doing? We're not overcrowding it. We have plenty of fresh air, right? Got lots of fans, got a lowered roof, right? So, we're going to we're going to make sure we got a comfortable environment. Um, that's a slightly better picture of the same thing, right? And if I I will go there. This is a funny picture.
(13:59) The feed the feed area is actually much wider than that. It's just the aspect of the picture. Uh, but I used to go there at 5:30, six o'clock in the morning with a cup of coffee and just walk around and the owner would come in the other end. He's like, "What are you doing?" I said, "Trying to figure out how the cows are doing this.
(14:14) " Right? But when I walk in that barn, what do I hear? Absolutely nothing except burps and farts, right? Um, it's quiet. They might get up and eat, but they go lay down, right? And they're just doing their thing. Um, and I find that fascinating, right? There's some of those girls we were talking about. You know, I and I it sounds a little, you know, sophomores should be doing this, right? But, you know, lots of fresh, clean water.
(14:43) Make sure these sand the sand beds make sure they're well tended. The cows are all clean. Um, cows are all using the stalls, the stalls are all managed well, so you get good stall usage, 13 hours of lying time, right? again, all the things that we'd want for cows, right? That's how we get these cows, right? And I think sometimes, you know, there's some neighbors to these, you know, there's a lot of herds here, but there's some neighbors to these guys just up the road that are complaining that they can't get the same components, they can't get the
(15:15) same milk. Well, they're 170% overcrowded, [laughter] right? And they're yelling at their nutritionist. Nutritionist calls me up. It's because, can you help me with these guys? I can't help you because it's not a it's not a biology problem. It's a management problem, right? But their feed efficiency sucks.
(15:32) It's like, well, you know, if you want what these guys are doing, depopulate your herd, right? But I think Oops. I think that I think the point is here is that we know how to do all this stuff. It's just how do we reinforce this and make best management decisions, right? Because the nutrition is only as good as the management around the cow, right? You can you can have CNCPS version 7 and do all the amino acid stuff, but if those guys are not doing all this, you know, and we all know that, right? If you feed cows, you know this. But and
(16:06) I get to feed I work with all these guys, right? This is we're all friends. We yell at each other. We drink beer. We still yell at each other and challenge each other, but it's all fun, right? My my um this is better for the Italian group, you know, but nothing we knew nothing is new for a cow producing 20,000 kilos.
(16:26) Nothing is new. We we know what we need to know, right? It's just more relevant. My analogy is a Fiat versus a Ferrari, right? What's the difference between a Fiat and a Ferrari besides €200,000 euro? Well, horsepower, right? They're both cars. They need gas. They need oil. They need tires.
(16:54) They need a driver, right? But if you want this one, you know, that this Fiat 500, the old Fiat 500's. Um, my Italian uncle had one, has still has one. 76 horsepower, right? I barely fit in it, right? Luckily, it's got a it's got canvas on the top, so my head, you know, because it it's about here when I'm sitting in it, right? And it's happy.
(17:17) It's happy at 60 km an hour, right? Whereas this Ferrari, I just learned they're not they're going to stop producing this one. 986 horsepower gets to 100 in two and a half seconds and you do 340, right? But if you want it to do that, what do you have to do? You have to spend more time managing the crazy thing, right? You can't just throw plain old gas at it.
(17:38) You got to use higher quality oil, tires, and things like that, or else it's just not going to work. That's that's these cows, right? It's just management intensity has to get better. The diet has to get better. But then if you think about that, meeting all the requirements is important for cows to achieve all those outcomes, right? Whether it's a MP, digestible amino acids, fatty acids, carbohydrates, you know, focus on milk components, not just volume.
(18:04) We we've hit that today pretty hard. Uh but, you know, all these things have to happen if we want to see these cows, right? And I just talked about all this, right? This is not not new. This was originally designed, you know, for for dairy farmers, not necessarily you guys. But it's kind of fun to revisit this because I think sometimes we get so enamored with some of this new information about amino acids, we we forget the basics, right? So, this is my way of reminding myself.
(18:31) But we also have to remember we got to characterize these cows, right? And in New York when we get to weigh cows, it's not uncommon to find this, right? That's in our research farm. I hate those cows, right? We have an indexing parlor. They come in, they're too damn big. The parlor can't lift. They're pushing against it.
(18:52) The grommets are shot. You know, we're trying to figure out how to upgrade our parlor, but we don't really want these cows. But again, that's the unintended consequence of selecting for milk, right? And just to show you how that's changed, 1993 when we identified this concept, we weighed the herd, it was 668 kilos plus or minus 57.
(19:16) In 2016, I saw research papers coming or not just data coming in from my grad students looking at the mature looking at the body weights and I said, you know, we better reweigh them again just to get uh our heads around this 803 plus or minus 73. Right? That's the unintended consequence of selecting for milk. But why I point that out is if you guys coming back to this whole gram of amino acid thing, right? We're talking about, you know, precision at the gram level.
(19:45) If you're a 100 or 200 or 300 kilos off on body weight, how good are your predictions going to be? It's all wrong. Right? When when we released uh CNCPS version 6.5, I got hate mail. Email, phone calls, text messages. Van Amber, what did you do? My Emmys don't work. My amino acids don't work. Everything is wrong.
(20:12) What did you break? We didn't break anything. What did we do? We made it more precise. We took the error out because we found out where the model was was not right. What does that mean about the inputs? They have to be more precise. Sam Fezdan was doing his PhD at the time. One of the nutritionists who was in the neighborhood was yelling at me.
(20:35) I I said to Sam, I said, "Sam, you got to go ride with this guy for for a few days off and on and figure out what's going on." And he rode with them and he comes back one day. He goes, "Mike, I figured it out. They don't know what cow they're feeding." Right? So, we went and got a bunch of weight tapes.
(20:49) We went out and we taped a bunch of cows, right? I couldn't get scales out there. We taped a bunch of cows. They were 150 to 180 kilos too light on the cow they were feeding, right? You put in the right body weights and what happened to all the predictions? All of a sudden they came together and me amino acids everything looked really good.
(21:11) Right? So, so that as we get the point here is that as we become more precise in our modeling efforts to the gram basis, these inputs are going to become really important, right? If you don't have that right, you're you're not going to know how to feed best feed that cow. Not just about the maintenance requirements, it's about everything else that goes with how the model works, right? These body weights are used to predict maintenance, passage rate, room volume, all these kinds of things that then and the passage rates are are part of how we get
(21:42) energy, right? So, you get poor energy predictions and amino acid predictions if you don't have the body weight correct. Then you'll say, well, the model's not working. Well, it's not the model. Probably the model didn't change. But if you don't have the cows characterized, you're not seeing it. Um this is a little bit about where the cows are going.
(22:06) Uh fat and protein, right? This is we we do milk marketing in a strange way in the US. Um we have these federal orders. Federal order one is the northeast US. This is includes New York and New England, parts of Pennsylvania. And you can see you know what's you know this is uh 2010 2024. You know fat's been rising, proteins rising, right? But you notice the the rise in fat is much greater than the rise in protein. That's a real problem.
(22:33) Processors are all upset about that because they can't make legal cheddar because we're getting too much fat and not enough protein. So, they're having to skim the milk now to make legal cheddar to get the ratio right. If you look at it this way, again, federal market milk market order one. This is 2010. This is 2024.
(22:54) You know, obviously this was done in October. you can tell when when it was put together. But, you know, if you look over that period, we see this pretty significant increase in fat. We see the seasonal effect here. Um, but we went up, you know, quite a few units. We go from like 375 roughly to 435, right? So, that's a pretty big jump.
(23:21) What about protein? Have we moved protein a little bit? Proportionately? No, not at all. Is this where the complaints coming from from the processors? Yeah. Um, Chobani has called me. Great Lakes Cheese has called me. Uh, I was communicating with Chbani this morning. Um they're saying, "Hey, Mike, you know, Great Lakes Cheese, which is a a major cheddar producer in the cheese producer, but cheddar producer in the Northeast, they're like, "You've got to fix this because we we have to skim milk now.
(23:56) " And we're not that's not what we do. And at the volume they run with the cheddar tanks they have, man, they're working hard to get that milk into the right relationship, right? You got to get more protein out of those cows. [laughter] Okay, that's okay. Uh we'll figure it out. But but it's not going.
(24:14) But does that mean the genetics for protein are not changing as fast as the genetics for fat? What do you guys think? Yeah, you're not sure, right? Because that's the implication here. Let's talk about that. Midwest is the same way. Midwest sees a little bit more shift. They got the same fat response, a little bit more shift in the protein.
(24:36) Here's uh the US sire breeding value for fat 1957 to 2023. Um, this is the updated slide that I have. This is the new base change in the US, right? So, back to 57. In today's numbers, you'd be minus 400 on those bulls. Um, notice it took a long time to cross the zero line, but look at the rate of change since then.
(25:03) It's almost exponential, which means what? Every calf born today has a whole lot more capacity than it did. And if you think about it from from 10 years ago or 20 years ago, man, we're a long ways away, right? Which means the nutrient requirements for these guys are doing what? Energy is easy.
(25:29) The amino acids and the fatty acid side of this, I'm not sure we know what to do yet, right? We're we're thinking about we we've got some cows that we can work with where we can do some genotype by nutrition interactions to kind of fret that out and that's on our to-do list for the next year. Right? So you're looking at it took 61 years to get to zero took seven years to go about a third of that distance. Right? 6.
(25:52) 4 pounds a year to 17 pounds a year fat potential. Right? That's just nuts. Three times faster rate of change with a new genetic base. Um, here's the sire and cow breeding values over 50 years for pro over 53 years for protein. One of the questions that I keep getting uh when I show this stuff, well, you show us the bulls, Mike.
(26:13) What about the cows? Well, there's the rate of change on the bulls for protein. So, first of all, that says, what about protein and fat? >> They're they're the same. Then, why the hell don't we see the phenotypic expression? What's that? >> Yeah, but why is it But that's a it's a harder question because why is it more energetically efficient for that cow to make fat and not the protein? That's my question is why f why is the first expression she has when we do put these nutrients in there is to make fat and not protein? I don't know. Anybody else got an answer
(26:56) in here? Let me know because that that would inform my research projects. [laughter] But but the cow is doing what? She's right there, right? So the male and female sides are going the same direction, right? So they're they're tight. We just have to figure out how to turn that on, right? Same kind of thing. Not quite the same rate of change, but it's it's at least doubled from where we were, right? So So we're moving fast on that. I showed you guys this.
(27:23) I don't need to go back through that. Right. We we've done all this already. Um we've applied it, you know, we've applied it in 65. Um we do think we do think that these cows today probably have some requirement for fatty acids that we're not describing. Right? And Adam Lock would stand up and say a cow can't make a triglyceride without feeding it some some palm.
(27:49) I don't think that the cows in Ireland and New Zealand would argue with that, right? because we don't do that down there and they still make plenty of fat. But as we get to these higher and higher levels of productivity, that's probably creating a demand function that we don't fully understand and a relationship that we have to work out, right? And that's we're we're thinking about that um um about we're thinking about how to how to get that worked out.
(28:19) This uh I always show this study because this is kind of where we had our aha moment, right? Um this is a dose titration of a rin modifier in complete transparency. It's it's rummensen. They they called me three times and I said, "No, I'm not interested in doing a rummensson study, right? I want to work on amino acids.
(28:40) " The fourth time they called, they said, "You can make any diet you want. Just put rummens in And I thought, "Oh, okay. In 30 years, nobody ever told me that." Right? So, so that but what that did is it gave us a license to use everything we had learned from the version seven development about amino acids and maybe some things about fatty acids and a few other carbohydrate twists and just put that in here and then just layer the rummens on there.
(29:06) Right? So, that's what we did. Right? 192 cows, 16 cows of pen, you know, three three milk three times a day. This is the important part, right? At the time of assignment, cows were about 120 days in milk on average, making about 42 kilos. Uh the fat was actually 41, not 40, and about 31 true protein. This part's important here.
(29:33) Um because you're going to see what the cows decided to do when we actually put those diets in front of them. All right, there's the diet again. Heavy corn salads mixed mostly legume. Hey, the cornstage was good. The halage was so so there's there's all the looks the same as the past. We put dextrose in there. We had some beet pulp.
(29:53) I I could you could use lactose. You could use molasses. At the time, the lactose and the dextrose were the same price at the mill. So, I just took dextrose. U blend up some fatty acids a little bit. Got your amino acids, some yeast. uh diet was 157 about 31 32% NDF about 5% sugar 26 starch 44 on ether extract and then there's you know we're at 82 at formulation we're at 82 and on thyine 222 on lysine and the histadine is going to be equal to that 54% forage uh in the diet trying to get the lowest UNDF and highest A&DOM digestibility corn came from the farm
(30:36) added the sugar talked about that. Um these are the cows they were about 70 71 to 72 m cows. So at the end 85 grams of methionine 229 and the lysine. This is this is where that number came from in the previous talk. What did the cows tell us? Right. So these cows at this point are about 190 days in milk. There's our titration zero 11 grams per ton 14 12 and 18.
(31:05) There was no change in intake. All the rummensen data would say, "Hey, you should see a decrease in intake." Those cows said, "Nah, we don't agree with that." Um, they've lost a little bit of milk by days in milk, right? From 42, they're down to about 3940. Energy corrected milk is running, you know, mid mid4s to high 40s.
(31:25) Energy corrected milk efficiency is is 1718. You know, we're in pretty good shape. Everything else looks good, right? Here's the interesting thing about this, right? Look at the fats. We took them from 41 to 46, 467, 472, 467 in established lactation, 120 days in milk. How's that? Sure caught us by surprise, right? Because we we start we Dave Barbo, my food chemist buddy's, analyzing the milk.
(32:01) Um and and he called me up 3 weeks in and he said, "Are those jerseys?" I said, "No, they're Holings." He goes, "They can't be." Right. No. He says, "No, I No, they got to be jerseys." I said, "No, they're Holings, Dave." And he I don't I don't never seen Holings like that. Right. I'll tell you what he meant here in a minute.
(32:22) Uh Milk True Protein moved it from 31 up to almost 34. Right. So midlactation, but this well this is why this caught us by why why with all that would they just make amino acids, right? But I I gave you guys the reason why this was the study that forced us to go back to the literature and figure out why the hell, you know, amino acids would cause an increase in milk fat because it's not it's not traditional thinking, right? It's uh not the way we look at this.
(32:50) When you look at denovos, we see, you know, we got plenty plenty of denovos. Actually, there was an effect of the rmensin on the denovos and on the mixed fatty acids. This is what Barbano was talking about and I'll show you in a minute. Right? And he he does all this chemistry. We get this real time mixed fatty acids, pre-formed fatty acids, chain length, double bonds, everything looks good.
(33:14) This is these are healthy cows, good milk, no CLAs. Um that that those glands are just just plowing away on making milk fat. Here's why he asked me that. This is Holene versus Jersey Farms 2019 published in a nutrition um conference proceedings. Here's Holene fat. Here's Denovo and mixed fatty acids. That's where his data stopped. There's are the cows.
(33:40) Didn't look like any Holings he'd ever had before. And that's where they ranked in the jerseys. Okay. So what we what we're learning with new genomics with new genetics and getting these nutrients met that we've got holings producing components like jerseys right well that's interesting right you know I make jokes about turning jerseys into another museum breed like air and kernies right doesn't make everybody happy but these guys are not they're their selection pressure is not right now is not nearly as intense as these guys. These guys are
(34:23) so far ahead of them. I do worry about um jerseys, right? Because they're they're just not they can do that but their milk volume's too low, right? So when we when we look at this though, you know, if you if you go back and think about nitrogen and energetic efficiency in this study going from the base diet to the treatment diet, right, there was no rumors effect, but the change in nitrogen efficiency midlactation was 8.1%.
(34:50) And the change in energetic efficiency on a on an energy corrected milk basis was 8%. Right? And if you look at that productive end, we were talking about this this morning, productive end to urinary end, we increase the productive end, we decrease the urinary end, and we push the ratio up just by amino acid balancing, right? So more efficient, right? Made made made improvements on financial returns and on environmental impacts.
(35:23) Another study and this is a cliffnotes version of this one. Um, right. So, we did at a company came up with a new prototype for methionine and we said they asked us if we would test it and we said we're going to test it but we want to test it our way. We again we're always challenging what we think we know.
(35:46) Right back to the mcalss per grams per mcal. We still want to challenge those numbers. So no supplementation of methionine, full supplementation of methane and then you know mathematically the intermediate right this this does two things one this tests the our boundaries it also tests the prototype if the prototype is effective then we should see something here and something better here.
(36:10) If it's not effective well maybe we got to go to full supplementation just to find an effect of the protected amino acid if it's not as protected as well as they thought it was. What's important about this is that the lysine was formulated at 3.2 grams per mcal and it's not on there but the histadine was formulated to be equal to to be equal to the methionine the full supplementation of methane in all these treatments.
(36:36) So so the methionine so the h the lysine and the histadine were not considered first limiting in any of these treatments. Uh that which would make methionine first limiting here and then we take away the limitation. So intakes were the same. Uh milk yield looks the same. Energy corrected milk yield significantly difference.
(36:59) Um milk true protein stepped right up. All right. Will here's one of those situations where the protein went faster than the fat. Uh we did not make these diets from scratch. We had to use an existing diet at the research farm and just kind of layer a few things on there. But the milk fat did do what? at full supplementation of methionine with the lysine and the histadine, it stepped up, right? But this was my point from this morning.
(37:25) We could add the lysine and the histadine, but if you don't add the methionine, what happens? You don't get the same effect, right? So, but if you if you do that and you layer in the methane now with all three of them, now you see the full effect, right? You you can't get something for nothing. Um, and then if you look at um, again on the denovos, boy, they stepped right up.
(37:46) The mix stepped right up. So, this says, hey, that cow has plenty of acetate. That cow has plenty of of whatever it needs to make those fatty acids because we've supplied everything that it would it needs to do that this treatment. You know, Barbo calls me up all the time, you know, always three weeks into the study saying, "What are you doing to these cows?" I said, "Why are you asking?" I don't we we c we have color coding for all these treatments.
(38:12) I I thought this was orange. It doesn't really matter. Whatever treatment, the orange treatment. Um he goes, "We got to get milk fat from those cows." I said, "Why is that?" He goes, "I got to make butter." What are you going to do with that? He goes, "That fatty acid profile would allow me to make spreadable butter right out of the refrigerator.
(38:32) " Hm. That's interesting, right? And and as the animal scientist listening to the food scientist and milk chemist, all of a sudden the conversation changes because it suggests that we could modify milk composition to meet processing demand. That the cows fed this diet had a value beyond just the milk, fat, and protein.
(39:00) That it actually had a manufacturing property. Well, that's exciting because it says as we change how we differentiate milk, maybe there's ways to make diets that make milk composition that now makes the processor want to pay the producer more money, right, for certain needs. It becomes very specific, right? We can't pull the milk.
(39:25) You know, it changes the way we think about how we we do milk hauling and all that kind of stuff. But you guys you guys can see what's going on there, right? But it was it was a fascinating conversation. Same kind of thing though. Let's go back to the environmental side. Here's nitrogen intake. Not different. Productive end went up 15 grams.
(39:43) Urinary end went down. Our productive end, you know, we told I said to you, you know, that goal of one one is good. Anything less greater than that is great. Well, we started at one two with the non-treated cows or not full supplementation. By the time we got to full supplementation, what happened? Man, we're at we're almost at 14.
(40:04) That's fantastic, right? That's an incredible efficiency if we can maintain that, right? So, we can enhance milk components and midlactation if we meet the requirements. You know, enhances not just energetic efficiency, but energetic efficiency. We're learning that holene cattle can produce components like Jersey cattle if fed the appropriate diet and those cows are going to be more environmentally friendly right as we do all of that stuff.
(40:33) But again, some just some comments about how we're doing it. Well, guess it's time for lunch.