Forensic Look at Chelated Minerals with Stephen Ashmead, Dr. Bill Weiss and Maria Spindola - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t0njcSk0Fwg

Transcript:
(00:08) Good evening everyone and welcome to the real science exchange. The podcast where leading scientists and industry professionals meet over a few drinks to discuss the latest ideas and trends in dairy nutrition. Uh tonight we've assembled uh a panel of of folks to talk about to take a forensic look at chelated minerals.
(00:29) Uh but before we get started, uh I need to I need to provide a disclaimer, right? Three of the four panelists we've got on the screen tonight are Balcom employees. And if there's one thing that I've learned on my many many years uh on this molten rock circling the sun is that people have biases, right? Uh you know it, I know it, we deal with it every day.
(00:49) But I've talked to my colleagues and we're going to do our level best to check our biases uh and agendas at the door. And and why are we doing that? Because you guys didn't come here for a commercial, right? You came here for real science and that's why you keep coming back. And so we're gonna we're gonna stick to that.
(01:06) Now, now with that said, I am going to give a little commercial here up front. And uh and I'm going to ask uh Stephen Ashme to help me do that. Now, Stephen was our featured speaker for a webinar that we did just a couple days ago, actually, and it was titled uh taking a forensic look at chelated minerals. Now, Stephen, um, most people don't know about Balkim, uh, being a a trace mineral company, but there nothing could really be further from the truth.
(01:34) We're we're actually the original, as I understand it, and and I think you can tell us a little bit about that. Would you mind kind of giving us a history lesson with about your grandfather, uh, Harvey Ashme, and and how did he get started in the keelated mineral business? >> Sure.
(01:55) Um so my my grandfather started um Albian Laboratories in 1956. Um at the time it was in Ogden, Utah. Um and it was near the uh Inner Mountain Stockyards um associated with Union Pacific Railroad. And he he was a pharmacist by training and uh his business model at that time was to sell common veterary pharmaceuticals uh wholesale to to the farmer.
(02:21) um and was successful at that. But he he then got interested in some of the the feeds, particularly some of the premixes and how some of the minerals in the premixes don't see didn't seem to be absorbed very well ended up basically still in in the manure at at the end. So he started investigating in into that and and he he uh um worked with the the concept of of chelation trying to mimic what was what was actually the mineral form within the food stuffs and um developed a line of minerals and started going into to uh chelated minerals for for animals for
(03:00) the premixes and that's where Albian started their their their venture into organic trace minerals. and expanded from there to human nutrition um dietary ingredients and uh from there also into plant nutrition dietary ingredients. Um so uh it covered kind of all all three three business um models as well.
(03:28) And uh so that's that's kind of how it started. And then uh when my grandfather passed away, my dad um took over the business and then in 2016 uh Balkam acquired the the Albian business. So they they acquired the originality of it. So >> All right. Very well. Thank you for that, Stephen. Now tell us a little bit about Albian Mineral.
(03:50) I think you do the formulation for both the animal nutrition products as well as the human nutrition products. So tell us about your involvement with human nutrition and tell us a little bit about their uh the Albian's business there. >> So Albine creates uh the Albian minerals on the human nutrition side are bislycinate chilates.
(04:11) Um they're they're created as dietary supplement ingredients. So they market the 50 lb or 25 kilo or 20 kilo sacks and that then get further incorporated into the the the the gummies, the pills, the capsules, things of that nature or or even into food fortification um uh products. So um the they they get fortified particularly outside the um the United States who get there's customers who fortify milk and pasta and flour and sugar and so on like that but provide provide chilated minerals for that. So um those were originally set up
(04:47) to be very high purity high potency uh products um uh much more so than than what's than what was typically available at that time. >> Yeah. I might add as well is that Albin is the world's largest manufacturer of chelated minerals for human nutrition. Um I I actually take uh some myself. I take their their magnesium.
(05:10) Uh one thing I learned uh during your introduction for the uh webinar is that you're you've you've got a passion for expertise related to magnesium. Uh >> yeah. >> So tell us a bit about that. >> So magnesium is an interesting mineral. It's fairly ubiquitous. Um it's one of those things that at least in human nutrition um is very very hard to diagnose.
(05:33) There's probably some subclinical uh deficiencies that we're rock walking around with but um it it's it's hard to diagnose. Magnesium is usually colllocated with calcium. Um so you use calcium for contraction your muscles. Use magnesium to relax the muscles. Um so it it's it's essential there. It's also the only dialocation that you can lose in your sweat.
(06:01) So if a lot of perspiration u particularly in hot humid environments under exertion, you're going to be losing magnesium in your sweat. So um it's it's a it's definitely an interesting mineral. >> Yeah. Well, thank you for that, Stephen. Uh Stephen, we are we do have a pub theme here. Uh would you mind sharing with us your your drink of choice? >> So So I I I don't drink alcohol, but my my advice is >> Yeah.
(06:26) >> The Mountain Dew. >> Mountain Dew. >> Yeah. And as I said on the pre-show, I think my alcohol is healthier than your Mountain Dew. So, just >> third ingredient is orange juice. So, mine mine mine has fruit juice in it, so I'm good. >> All right. Very well. Uh we we we have another uh distinguished guest with us, Dr.
(06:48) Bill Weiss. Bill, uh tell us a little bit about yourself. Well, I'm a retired professor from the Ohio State University. I worked there for about 40 years. A lot of work in minerals and vitamins. So, this is an area I'm I'm quite familiar with. So, look forward to the discussion. >> Yeah, we thought you'd be a great guest.
(07:07) In fact, during the the webinar, we we uh invoked your name a couple times. You probably heard that. So, maybe we'll follow up on some of those questions. Uh Bill, why don't you tell us what's in your glass tonight? >> Well, it's a Raleigh drum. Rally drum lemon shanty from Great Lakes Brewing Company. So, >> okay.
(07:25) >> If you like shanties, it's as lemony as it gets. >> Okay. I love shanties, but I don't get the Great Lakes up here very often, >> but it's it's very refreshing. It probably be the last shanty of the season. >> Good deal. All right. And got a special co-host tonight. Uh we got Dr. Maria Spendola.
(07:48) Uh Maria, you are brand new to Balkam. So why don't you uh introduce yourself and tell us uh tell us a bit about yourself? >> Yeah, of course. So my name is Marie Spindola. I graduated for uh in veterinary medicine in University of S. Paulo and I also earned my PhD from the same university always focusing on livestock and even though my background is very health oriented I have been working for uh nutrition for the nutrition area for almost 15 years and I'm just joined baling this year to lead the mineral for our animal division and it's a pleasure to be here. I'm hoping
(08:25) to to learn a lot. >> Yeah. Well, thank you, Maria, for joining us and looking forward to the conversation and your contribution to it. Um, myself tonight, I've selected a Baker's Kentucky straight bourbon whiskey, 107 proof, Todd Crayons from Select Sireers. Uh, he recommended this. This is this was bottled in uh December of 2016 and was in the barrel for seven years and three months.
(08:54) So, uh, yeah, it's it's Todd, you you did a nice job, buddy. This this is a good one. I'm going to keep this one on the list. Uh Stephen, why don't we jump in uh right now? Uh give us kind of the 30,000 foot overview of the presentation uh that you gave a couple days ago and what are what are some of the key takeaways that uh we need to talk about during this this podcast? Welcome to the next generation in chelated minerals.
(09:28) Introducing new Kishir plus amino acid chelated minerals from Balm. Kishir Plus delivers a higher concentration of mineral with a superior amino acid profile. The higher mineral content adds formulation flexibility opening up space in the ration and also reduces the carbon footprint. The superior amino acid profile delivers 28% protein from microbial biomass and reduces the amount of supplemental lysine needed in the ration.
(09:58) The Kishir Plus line also offers a granulated form for improved handling characteristics and reduced dust. Visit balchm.com to see how new Kishir Plus can deliver the added benefits you need to improve performance and reduce manufacturing hurdles. So uh chelated minerals are really a chemical reaction between a um an some sort of organic organ um typically amino acids are are are what what we use and metals and they form form a ring-like structure that really helps protect the mineral from antagonists which results in greater bioavailability u because
(10:36) those antagonists can remove effectively remove minerals from the diet. um and so the minerals are still there but they're just not available. Um so uh when you start looking at that from that standpoint it's a chemical reaction you can formulate and create these chates and make sure they're properly chilated.
(10:58) Um, and one of the biggest things that I see when I when I look at uh products is just knowing knowing the molar ratios. Just knowing that you have the same number of molecules of amino acids you do for metals and and uh then then you just make sure that they're joined up through your chemical process.
(11:20) So 30,000 foot if you got properly chilated you you can have a good product that will will help with the antagonistes that are going to be in the in the diet and in the water. >> So you mentioned antagonist is that the primary mode of action for u chelated minerals and the reason for feeding them is because there are antagonists in the feed.
(11:44) Are there any other uh indications for chelated minerals? So keid minerals in my view are are or organic trace minerals are are are more bioavailable um as as a general rule than in organics. And I I really think that because there are antagonists in the diet um you know and that that you know it's not exclusive to animals. We we as as fellow human beings we we eat a lot of antagonist and drink a lot of antagonist in our diet as well.
(12:17) So, it's not exclusive. It's just there. Our bodies are pretty good. Animals bodies are pretty good as a whole trying to extract those minerals out, but having them preceded certainly helps out. It's it's really trying to mimic what the food does versus adding some inorganics to to the diet. >> So, so do chilated minerals does that help with the active transport across um the cell membrane at all? So there is theory that yeah it does uh but and maybe Bill you know of some studies I'm not aware of any studies that directly have measured fat
(12:51) transported accelated minerals across we usually look at functionality of bioavailability in terms of you know serum values or other functionalities in there but I I I'm not aware of any invivo or in vitro studies of stuff moving across may maybe you know of some >> yeah there's been in vivo there's not it's so hard to do >> but there is cell culture work uh with different different organic minerals and they're absorbed differently than than the the the free metals.
(13:21) There are at least some of them are absorbed differently in these cell culture things. Um some of them obviously will be dissociate and go through the standard metal metal transporters but some there's evidence that some of it is transported into the interasite differently than than the standard inorganics. >> Yeah.
(13:41) which may be one of the reasons of for better bioavailability. You now got two two potential absorption sites instead of just the one. >> Yeah. And and you you're I I agree with you and I was just going to say some of the papers I've seen maybe suggest that might be through the essential amino acid pathway particular if your metals is is uh joined up to an essential amino acid.
(14:03) And I I guess I'd like you know I think there's to me there's more if you'd asked me this question 15 years ago I said the big difference is absorption. It's more more absorbable. But I think a lot of the new data says there's a lot of stuff or the source of these metals have a lot of effect on the bacteria within the rin and the intestine which has you know market effects on the animal. this microbiome stuff.
(14:32) And I think a substantial effect of these organic trace minerals is within the intestine, not not it they're going to have some effects even if they aren't absorbed differently than the sulfates or the chlorides. They there's at least two or three papers looking at the microbiome in in cattle and they're different.
(14:54) If you feed zinc sulfate or organic zinc or hydroxy zinc, they're different. They change the bacteria and that can have a huge effect on immune function. Huge effect. So, I think it's much bigger than just absorption. I think there's much many more effects that we're just now starting to think about. >> Well, Bill, can you kind of expound on that? I think you know a conversation you and I had the other day was related to sulfates and and and the maybe some issues that they may be causing in the rin.
(15:26) >> Yeah. Again, as a a metal source, the sulfates in most cases are pretty good. I mean, that's that's the reason we supplement trace minerals because all the research, you know, 50 years ago showed that supplementing sulfates are does some good. But again, we learn stuff. And I I used to be I said sulfates are fine or maybe a mix of organics and sulfates.
(15:51) But as we learn about some of the negative effects of sulfates in the room, you know, the these metals are toxic to bacteria. Copper and zinc are toxic. Manganesees to a lesser extent, but they're toxic and we depend on bacteria to digest fiber. There's been with the hydroxies less data with with organics, but when you compare the sulfates to hydroxies or sulfates to organics and look at fiber digestibility, very often it's higher with the the nonsulfate sources.
(16:24) And I I can't prove this, but I don't think it's because the the the nonsulfate stimulate. I think it's the sulfates inhibit. and and a few points of fiber digestion can buy an awful lot of minerals. A few it's huge. The the effect on the potential effect on energy to me is as big as the effects of the the better absorption of the metal. It's huge.
(16:52) >> Maria, uh you're you're very nice young lady. You're you're not interrupting. So, but you got to learn that uh that that that I tend to take over. So you got to elbow your way in. So what what kind of questions do you have? >> Yeah. No, thank you. I was wondering about all these interaction between the antagonists, right? And what uh Dr.
(17:13) Bill said about something that can be uh cheap. So we are supplementing a lot, right? So this is something that I always tell to my husband. Don't eat too much salt >> because it's not because the salt is cheap uh that you're going to you're going to you're going to to make health going to make you uh more healthier uh right so I think it's the way uh as we think on inorganic minerals we need to think about excess of minerals not necessarily because they are cheap they are not interacting interacting in a negative way with other nutrients right
(17:52) So uh we do have some old studies but very nice studies on the literature that shows the bad interaction or the antagonism effect on vitamins. I don't know Bill do you have any uh experience with that we really saw that inorganic minerals can decrease the stability of important vitamins like vitamin A vitamin E whereas when we are using organic minerals we don't have this interaction so do you have any any data to share uh with us about the vitamin lower degradation using organic minerals >> it's a big it's probably not a major
(18:34) ajor problem in TMRs because that everything's so dilute but in in premixes or in concentrate mixes or inorganic sulfates uh especially vitamin A vitamin E to a lesser extent but especially vitamin A it's it's increases the degradate the the degradation of or the loss of potency of vitamin A supplemental vitamin A again especially in in premixes and concent concentrate mixes.
(19:05) So that's and the organ the organics basically are inert with respect to to to vitamin breakdown. So that's another benefit. >> Can you expound on the relationship of time, Bill? I mean, how long does it take for it to to to attenuate the the vitamins? >> It it's if you look and it it's so dependent on how the vitamin is stored.
(19:29) You know, vitamins are rather labile. So if they're stored on like under farm conditions with big temperature changes, high humidity, maybe sun exposure, that's going to make it much quicker. The the degradation, again, vitamin A is the the by far the most sensitive. And there's studies showing is 10 to 15% reduction in potency per month in vitamin A in these these mixes.
(19:57) And that would be increased. And these are under not ideal conditions but under more farm conditions. So it it's not a small small drop. You know you lose 10 or 15% a month. That's that's a lot. >> And it can be very costly, right? It's not about only the health, but it is very costly. >> Yeah.
(20:18) Yeah. And you know, if you're assuming you're feeding, you're trying to formulate for a 100,000 units and a month later you only got 90,000 units or 80,000 units, that that can lead to some issues down down the road. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Like like Bill said, it's really a three-legged stool that affects it. It's going to be temperature, um, humidity, time, and and UV exposure as well.
(20:46) Yeah, Stephen, I've had the opportunity to talk with a lot of nutritionists and I can tell you for a fact that there's a lot of confusion in the marketplace related to different chelated mineral technologies, right? Uh there just are. And you kind of touched on that during your presentation. You've got your proteinates, you got your complexes, you've got uh amino acid keelates, you've got um ones that are are bound to sugars.
(21:11) Um, can you talk a little bit about the differences between some of those chemically and and maybe even performance-wise? >> So, yeah, there is there is a lot of confusion. So, so part of it has to do with there's so many definitions within within AFCO. Um there you know you've got >> sorry sorry to interrupt Stephen but but but on that the def different definitions in AAFCO a lot of that's gamesmanship right by the companies that put those together and and >> there is some yeah >> maybe talk a little bit about that I mean I maybe people don't even
(21:44) understand that I find it intriguing >> so companies can um can ask for a definition that will you know that will cover their product it takes It takes some time and some some uh uh uh you know again trying to remove the biases, some political maneuvering to to get to get something approved.
(22:11) Um but uh uh there there those definitions are what the regulators particularly in the US and Canada rely on in terms of of how to classify classify a product. Um so when you look at those AFCO definitions you got a whole bunch of them there. Um some of them are specific to a particular company such as the methane hydroxy analoges.
(22:32) Um others are more general like the metal proteinates. Um but that there's a lot of companies who who who operate underneath that. Um, but when you start looking at I I still think that those AFCO definitions are useful in terms of identifying what should be expected. So, you know, if you've got a definition that says it has to be a keyite, you should be able to find some or should those products should have some of those characteristics of of being a key.
(23:02) Complexes are it's an interesting relationship between a key and a complex. Um, and the one that you that the example that I used in the in the webinar and I'll use here is kind of geometry where a a rectangle is defined as basically being a four-sided object each side parallel to each other with right angles at the corners.
(23:27) A square is also a rectangle rectangle, but it's a special form of a rectangle. So, so using kind of that same analogy, chilates are really complexes from a chemical definition, but there's special forms of those complexes and that and that special form is related to that the formation of that ring structure which in my opinion provides that that protection versus having a complex where there might not be that ring structure.
(23:52) So that this not doesn't have as good a stability for the bi for excuse me for the for the mineral. So it doesn't with it with it being opened out there um I think it's a little easier for for other things in the diet to strip that that metal off um versus when it's in a ring structure. >> And then do you see or is there any evidence that there's difference performances uh between the different types? Uh so in biological systems um and I'm sure Bill you you you have experienced this too.
(24:36) Murphy rules quite a bit in bi in biological research. So sometime you you can see differences um and and they're a little more apparent I think you see them a little bit more apparent in in vitro systems where you can control some of the some of the conditions than than say say out in doing farm research or field research but yeah I think there there are some differences particularly when you start stressing systems um I've seen some papers where particularly some in vitro systems where they stress systems and looking at differences between chilates
(25:10) and complexes and complexes will respond to to to the stress but the chilates respond better to that stress in terms of you know still delivering um some some neural payload. Uh but and you can you can still cover those um uncover those in in uh um in uh biological research or or field research but sometimes Murphy rules and you don't get to see the differences that you're that you're looking for.
(25:41) I I just say trace mineral and vitamin research is the hardest thing about that is what do you measure? >> Yes. >> If I'm doing a protein study, I'm going to measure milk protein outfit. It's sensitive. But with trace minerals, you know, what do you measure? >> Yeah. >> You know, if it you're you're not it may have a production response, but you're going to need hundreds of cows because the production response is likely healthier cows and it's going to take a lot of cows to see that.
(26:07) >> Sure. So a lot of it is you know you take in vitro or you take some blood measurements or liver measurements and you have to do a lot of extrapolation or like Steve was saying stress the system and that research gets expensive. So that there's a there's always going to be a lot of confusion in this area because we just are never I shouldn't say never but it's unlikely we're ever going to get real definitive data.
(26:34) They say we do this test and >> A is better than B, but we just aren't going to have that. >> We we same issue in human nutrition. I mean, going back to the magnesium, you know, >> yeah, >> blood magnesium just not a responsive thing to to magnesium intake. You want a magnesium, the gold standard is 24hour urinary output.
(26:54) >> Same for cows. >> So, and that's a little bit more difficult to do. Particularly the cows might be a little easier. It's a lot more difficult with cows. >> So, A lot of things you you know you you believe the research that's out there and you know you have to do some extrapolation. So you can look at the chemistry which is beyond me but you know is the the chemistry sound and then go from there.
(27:21) >> Maria sharpen your elbows. Come on in. What do you got? No, I was thinking about about that and how to track what's the the best biioarker, right, that we need to to follow to understand if the enzyme is working because we understand if that if that enzyme is working well. So it has a proper level in the blood means that all the the minerals that are involved as a co-actor of this enzyme are working well.
(27:51) So this should give us uh some kind of uh good idea information but this is not applied right. I think this is the most difficult thing. This is definitely not applied and if we want to to know better it it will need uh we will need to make a huge investment and the environment is always changing. So >> the more we study and we have our uh R&D facility, we see that we really need to to trust our mineral provider, right? Really need to trust that we have the the chemical part covered.
(28:29) So the nutritionist can uh be uh sure that he doesn't need to be wor with minerals, right? that we we have the the minerals covered because it's very uh difficult to have this um this um comparison when we are talking on on field extrapolation and and Stephen something that I would like you to share with the guys here you were talking about the interaction I was here drinking my my Brazilian coffee and and Scott was asking me about that because not a good time for coffee but For me, my Brazilian coffee is always a
(29:09) good time. Uh, and Stephan, you shared a very >> Same for my Kentucky bourbon or Ohio beers. Exactly. >> Yeah. And know you never know. Sorry. >> Maria and I can drink our drinks in the car. You guys can't. So, >> that's true. >> We can we can drive. But Stephen, you shared a very good tip about interaction.
(29:37) you uh can you repeat that here for our friends on the on the podcast that we never we should never never get iron with coffee. Is that correct? >> Right. So So iron and um green and black teas not so much herbal teas but green and black teas have uh polyphenolic compounds in there that will that inhibit the absorption of iron in human nutrition.
(30:00) So if you if you want to take your iron supplement and get the maximum per utilization of the iron supplement, take it with a glass of orange juice or lemonade and that's that's a much better much better um much better you have much better absorption of that. Ascorbic acid is a known promoter of iron absorption. So, you know, take it with your vitamin C or or your orange juice or something like that or even just a high protein meal.
(30:28) That'll help out as well. But yeah, take it with your coffee or your tea. You're going to inhibit the absorption of that iron. >> Yeah. >> But going back to your your thing, Maria, you know, it's not so easy just to have a standard biioarker. I mean, every single mineral has its has its own biioarker.
(30:46) you know, the biioarker that is accepted for zinc might be different, but copper, which is different than iron. So, it makes it a little bit more difficult to do some of some of that research and some of those some of the minerals we still haven't settled on what is the the gold standard for the biioarker for that for that mineral. So, >> it's enzyme can vary a lot depending on the time of the day as well, right? >> Yeah.
(31:13) Yeah. To me, one reason we made great progress in selenium is because we have very sensitive biomarkers. >> Yes, >> blood is a great measure of selenium, glutathione, peroxidase and a few others. >> Manganesees I I studied manganesees for 30 years. I have no idea how to evaluate bioavailability. None. >> No, >> because nothing changes.
(31:35) You can you can liver, you know, you can change intake tfold. Liver concentrations might change two or three percent. You're never going to find these differences. Zinc is hard. There's a few. It's a little bit better, but not great. Copper, we have liver. Um, but there's great questions as to what the proper liver copper should be.
(31:58) We know it's sensitive to changes in intake, but what's the right amount? We have ranges, and that's that range is becoming questioned a little bit, especially at the high end. So this biioarker thing is I wish we it would make life of mineral researchers a whole lot easier if we had good accepted biomarkers for all these.
(32:20) It is so hard >> and I know something I sorry Scott can I just ask another >> uh thing here just to get things a little bit more complicated u about minerals in raw material right we don't know how much mineral we have in our forages uh this can vary a lot uh do you have anything uh be on that side to understand better mineral composition because it's very hard to talk about a suggestion on a good level of minerals if we don't understand what the cows are eating >> in in I'm going to have to limit it to North American forges because that's
(32:56) where we have the most datab huge databases and and I so I don't know if the distribution is the same in other countries but these trace minerals in general and forages are not as variable as people think they have they have a very non-normal distribution these huge long long tails of you know the median might be six parts per million copper, but you're going to get some with 20 and 30 parts per million.
(33:26) Um, most of those appear to be outliers, bad contamination, soil contamination, so on. So on trace minerals, I'm a big fan on forges to use averages and and even a book average is probably better than a farm specific one or two samples. and and we've done quite a bit of simulation with copper zinc and manganesees is the only three we've looked at.
(33:53) And if you use the the median from a good database for for corn silage or alpha alpha so on use the median you're probably less likely to be wrong than if you use an individual one or two spot samples from a farm. So you should you shouldn't don't put in zeros that we know there's more than zeros. I encourage nutritionists to to start generating their own database.
(34:18) You know, they're going to be sampling these feeds in an area. Get get an a good average copper for corn silage or or alpha alpha or whatever. And use the average. Do not don't ever rely on a single point estimate on trace minerals from forages. You're you're going to the chance of you being very wrong is higher than using a book.
(34:41) So, but don't don't do zeros. Too many nutritionists say, "Well, I don't trust the number, so I'm going to use zero." And I can guarantee zero is wrong. That I can guarantee it's wrong. >> Yeah, I I I agree with you, Bill. I mean, the the averages um where we've got good data. I think there might be less data outside the US.
(35:01) Um particularly in some of the areas where some of the the growing areas are not ideal growing areas like we have in the Midwest which is you know an ideal growing area for for some of these some of these forages there. there might be a little bit more variability and you might see and maybe you can comment to this bill that you know I've read some literature u and this is more on the human nutrition side particularly for some of the ultra trace minerals like selenium that there might be a little bit more variability in selenium depending upon
(35:31) where that forage is grown what what names in the soil >> yeah selenium is one exception where I just except in certain areas of the Dakotas maybe Montana where they pretty have high so selenium soils. That's one where I do just put zero in. >> But the copper, manganese, zinc, those I I put in at least an average.
(35:51) But yeah, selenium and the regulations are such you can assume zero. So the regulations allow supplemental, not not total. So >> and maybe maybe the other thing I'd add to to this too, Lam Maria, is that when we start looking at trace minerals, um you know, you have an optimal range for for those trace minerals.
(36:13) don't have a just a single point where that where it's good. You've got a range there where the animal's going to be somewhat adaptable um to to what's coming in. So that can kind of account for whatever minute variations there are within the local forages. Um so it you know that that we have that going for us. uh you know some some minerals that that that optimal area is a little narrower like with selenium but um you know uh with with things like zinc and and copper you know those those have fairly fairly good ranges that and animals are are pretty
(36:49) adaptable to that you're not going to cause a problem one way or the other. You know, ruminants evolved at the three or four months of the year they barely lived and because the nutrition was so poor and they they they're designed to load up the liver with trace minerals during when times are good and when times are bad, they mobilize them.
(37:09) So, you know, you don't have to be perfect every day. You probably don't have to be perfect every week on trace minerals. Uh animals are are flu they're adaptable. They >> they can handle deficiencies and I think that's off the topic a little bit. One of their problems we have with trace mineral research is our dairy cows today are in such good status.
(37:31) It may take me three months of feeding no a deficient diet before I ever can have any response to it a diet. So, you know, it it's the the liver, the cow is designed to handle short-term uh deficiencies, dietary deficiencies. >> Bill, kind of related to that, do you think we're overfeeding trace minerals today? >> Yes. >> Yes. Okay.
(37:55) >> It's Yeah, there I've seen so many diets in my life and and I pay attention to trace minerals and vitamins. Vitamins are probably worse than trace minerals. Uh it's gotten better. Uh there's some manganesees is a non-issue. You know, I think the requirement is too low and you should be probably two times NASM to be cover that.
(38:22) Zinc is probably also a little low in NAS if you look at all the data. So I don't have an issue with that being two times NAM or or there if you start getting three and four times you have to start questioning that. Copper is one that we overs supplement it a lot that's coming back and that is probably if you know when you talk about toxicity there's different ways to express it one is in milligrams or micrograms per day uh which is useful but I usually when I taught class I'd express toxicity relative to requirement in other words if you fed five times requirement was it
(39:00) toxic but and if you express it that way. Copper is the most tra toxic trace mineral we feed relative to the requirement. You can get in trouble with two two and a half times requirement on copper. Requirements probably 10 to 15 parts per million. You know, we used to see 30s. Um and and now I see and I don't see as many diets as I used to, but now I do see a lot of dietary coppers in the mid teens parts per million.
(39:30) That's where they should be. I don't see 30s anymore. So, it's it it's helped selenium again, you know, the for a lactating cow, the the.3 or point4 when you add in basil is probably good enough for almost all lactating cows. We don't need to feed 6 or 7. Um, dry cows, you can make an argument the the regulation is too low.
(40:02) Um, and the regulation is on a concentration basis. Requirements are on a mass basis. Dry cows eat half as much feed as a lactating cow. The selenium needs aren't that much different between a lactating cow and a dry cow. So you could make an argument you should I can't tell you to do this because it's against the law but there higher than than regulation in dry cows biologically can be be uh you know you can come up with a reason justification of that I can't again it's illegal so I won't say do it but the there's no reason to be two or three times nimm you
(40:40) could argue naim isn't perfect it isn't but there's no reason to be two and three times higher than Mesa for any of these things. >> I've recently been having a conversation, email conversation with um a consulting nutritionist and and so this question is a little bit related, Bill.
(40:57) Maybe you've covered some of it, but he said, "I think people are confused about the direction in the NAS about feeding for the average or the upper end of the needs for a group and the difference between a requirement and a recommendate recommended level. Can you talk to that? It's in when Nason when we sat down and did this, we if you're familiar at all with the human the I can't even think of the name of it now for the human nutrition guidelines.
(41:25) >> Yeah. The DR Yeah, the DRRi and then the RDA, the recommended daily allowance. The recommended daily allowance builds in a safety factor >> and it's based theoretically it's based on variability in the population that some of this data we don't have any data on variability but that's the theory and so what we did in NAS we have no idea what the variability in the copper requirement is among cattle we have no idea we might have an idea of how variable the copper concentration in milk is but that's only part of the
(42:00) requirement So what we did was we said, "Okay, how variable is meta if I have a a cow that's if I have 10 cows that are producing the same amount of milk, they weigh the same, everything's about the same. How variable is metabolism?" And so we looked at fasting heat production as a measure of metabolism. And the variation in that was about the coefficient of variation is about 10 10%.
(42:30) And so if you do, you know, if you want to feed 95% of the population, it's two standard deviations. And so that's 20 two two times the CV is is 95%. So in there, we'd say for most nutrients, if you'd feed 20% above NASM, you're accounting for variability. So, if I have a group that needs, I'm making this number up, needs 20 milligrams of copper a day, which they need a lot more, but if they need 20, you should be feeding 24 or so a day to that to that.
(43:02) You should have average 24 milligrams a day. So, that that safety factor, that recommendation is trying to account for normal variation. It doesn't account for like what Steve was talking, antagonism, stress, none of that. It's just the normal variation with what we'd expect within a pen of cows. >> Yep. >> It's all chemistry.
(43:28) >> Yeah. And like I said, then if you would when I taught, you know, I say you start with NASA, you tack on 20%. You look at antagonism and then you adjust for if you have a lot of sulfur in the water, a lot of sulfur in the feed sulfates, you kick it up again and you keep looking at these adjustments and you can get it up to again maybe for copper up to 1.
(43:52) 8 times numm and that's under very bad conditions but that's about as high as I ever could get justify on when you take all this stuff into account. But you you should definitely feed above NASM. NASM, even if it was perfect, only feeds the average cow. It doesn't feed cows that have higher than average requirements.
(44:15) >> Yeah. I'm going to go out on a limb here and uh but in the interest of transparency, Bill, uh can you kind of give us your opinions and thoughts on organic trace minerals and how do you recommend feeding them in the field? this I get that's the question when the phone rang that's a question I hated to get because you know I like to base my opinions on data >> right >> and again it's it's so hard to because we don't have good measurements so it's really hard to say I always say buy it from a reputable company that's number
(44:47) one no matter what you're what you're buying and then I look and say you know the some of the the best nutritional advice still is eat eat a variety of sources of nutrients in moderation. I still think that's great nutritional advice. So I think a a a more than one source of a nutrient is good.
(45:16) So I am I'm I am a fan of combinations organics and I used to be a fan say feed some some inorganics and some organics and people would ask what combination I say I have no idea punt 5050 because I don't know what it is but with all this data on the negative effects of sulfates on fiber digestion I've I've gone away from that.
(45:43) Now I say let's do half half half hydroxy half half good quality organics. But I like combinations and again I I can't defend 5050. I don't know. But I do like combinations better than a single source of of the nut of the supplement. >> All right, makes sense. Stephen, uh anything for uh Bill? Bill, anything for Stephen? So yeah, I got a question for you, Bill.
(46:13) So knowing that the hydroxies um are insoluble, what about other insoluble minerals serving as the inorganic such as carbonates? >> Could you could you say that again? I I missed you what you said. >> Okay. So the knowing that the hydroxychlorides are are insoluble, >> so solubility is not a factor here. >> Yeah.
(46:33) >> What about other insoluble sources for the inorganic portion of the gas like oxides or carbonates? >> Yeah. the the you know CL the the standard form of copper oxide is you know basically inert so that one's out there is another and I don't know my chemistry enough there is another copper oxide with a different oxidation state that's looks to be okay so I think something like that would be zinc oxide might be a good good blend with organic zinc um I don't know that much about the carbonates so may they they the
(47:09) I' clearly not the chlorides or the sulfates. Those are, you know, those dissociate as well. >> I'd stay away from the standard copper oxide. I wish I wish I knew what what the definition of that standard was, but right, >> it's one we used to feed that did nothing. Um, but so that may be an approach to is these less soluble inorganics, but you want something that won't interact with the room and bacteria for to kill them.
(47:38) And then also it reduces antagonism. And I don't know, you might know the answer to this is is say with copper, well copper is again a bad one, but is these the oxides less likely to be antagonized than the sulfates? Uh so yes and no. So yet no because of the limited solubility is going to take a little bit longer to separate the the annion from from the from the cation.
(48:07) But once they get do get separated and they will get separated then they're going to be no different than the sulfates. Sulfates will just react much quicker with with the antagonist. I I think the key thing you said there um in your in your response is um and we don't have as much of an issue in monogastric.
(48:25) We still have the microbiome and monogastics, but it's not as as uh important if you in my opinion is with the rumin is make sure that it doesn't kill off the microbiome. And if you get a high dose of zinc oxide in there, you might kill off the the the microbiome or or negatively impact that microbiome as it as it becomes because you know these these oxides will hydrate to to hydroxides and then you got a big big pH uh >> effect.
(48:56) >> Okay. >> Yeah. Kind of want to double down on something, Bill. You said, you know, working with a good reputable company. Um there there are a lot of good reputable organic trace mineral companies uh with with good products, good companies, good people, and there's some you need to be aware of. Uh right. And and and we'll not name names, but Stephen, I I recall uh once we we had uh a cheap source of of material a customer was buying.
(49:27) We analyzed it and it was just basically a blend of protein and mineral. And so I I guess I don't know if you want to comment to that, but the takeaway is if it seems to be too good to be true, yeah, it probably is. >> So yeah, I I agree. Um, a lot of times you're going to in a sense get some of what you pay for um when it comes to organic trace minerals.
(49:49) If you if you find a really really cheap organic trace mineral or something that seems to be abnormally higher than what than others um in terms of the the mineral content. So let's just say for example, let's just use zinc as an example. You know, if you if you if you're getting an organic trace mineral that's, you know, they say it's organic trace mineral and you're getting up and they say, yeah, it could deliver, you know, 30 40% zinc content, that should be a enormous red flag that says you are not getting an organic trace mineral. um the the the
(50:22) the you know a typical organic trace mineral in today's markets should be you know again using Zikin as example a good one should be in the neighborhood of anywhere from that 10 to 20% range because that's where the chemistries work out um in in terms of that you can get some higher yes you can get some higher you can get some of the the glycinates that might be a little bit higher maybe up closer to 25 26%.
(50:54) But, uh, you know, the chemistry is going to put an absolute max moles, you know, limit on the amount of mineral that can that can be in there and still have it be be organically bound. >> Yeah. So, Stephen, you recently um created a brand new product for balm that is higher in in metal content compared to um >> u a lot of the competitors out there.
(51:21) uh could tell us how did you do that? What what is different about that product and and I know it took you a while but but you were able to get it there. >> So when you're looking at organic trace minerals you basically got two major components. You got your liant your protein your your amino acid you have your metal.
(51:41) Um so the metals you can it's easy to find good quality sources of metals you know and what I'm what I mean by that is make sure that it's going to be low in contaminants. You don't want a lot of heavy metals present in there because minerals are mined. They do come with heavy metals. So just make sure that you know those heavy metals you don't have excess in there.
(51:58) But the real difference is when you start looking at your lian getting good quality lians. I mean uh you know your your the amount of protein that is present in your in your lian makes a big difference. The higher you can make that protein content, that means that you, you know, when you start calculating out your MER ratios, you're going to be able to to have a higher mineral content because you got a higher protein content.
(52:27) You don't have a whole bunch of carbohydrate or other material um in there that is really nonworkable for formating the chilate that's going to still be present in there and diluting out the mineral content. So, so it is a little bit of work to try to find those high protein contents. um and good good quality proteins as well. Um that's going to deliver um you know a good mix of both essential and non-essential amino acids.
(52:54) Um you can go with single amino acids. They're a lot easier to formulate with from a chemistry standpoint because you don't have to deal with multiple multiple molecular weights of your of your amino acids. Um but then I think you limit some of what what we were talking about earlier about some of the um effects and absorption pathways that that uh might be beneficial with when you have a multiple multiple amino acid um organically bound trace mineral.
(53:21) >> Very well. You know just a real quick commercial. That product is called Kir Plus. All right. Thank you. Last commercial, I promise. All right. any any other big uh topics uh we need to cover folks. >> I do have one good about magnesium if we can go back because I do take magnesium as well and I give to my dogs.
(53:44) So we do have different magnesium. So good benefits uh of magnesium for different species right in companion animals we are seeing magnesium big trend um for their benefits. But I would like to to hear from you, Bill. How about mag organic magnesium instead of magnesium sulfate so we can escape the sulfate problem? >> Well, there's been almost no no research with organic magnesium in and ruminance.
(54:14) I think there's been one or two papers long ago actually. Um, magnesium and ruminance is a is quite a bit different than than non- ruminants. And one is we know it has to be soluble to be absorbed. So you know these organics and and the absorption is in the rin. It's the net the net absorption occurs in the room and not the intestine.
(54:37) So it has to be solubilized in the rin. Um and then even if it's soluble, it's still only going to be maybe 30 35% absorbed at best because there's so much antagonism potassium and otherwise. So, it has to be soluble, but even if it's soluble, you're still not going to have very good absorption no matter no matter what.
(55:00) It's just poor. And so, the the glycine because it has to dissociate, you know, I don't think it's going to be much less antagonized than than magnesium sulfate. But again, the sulfate has the negative connotations of sulfur for lactating cows. So, it might be be better than the sulfate because of it doesn't have sulfate, but it's not going to be I can't see it being that much more absorbable than than sulfate um or magnesium acetate um just because of this all this antagonism.
(55:37) So, it it gets away from the sulfate. It probably the problem with mag oxide is the variability. uh good mag oxide is as is almost as good as magnesium sulfate but you have to know what's good and that's the big question. So the the benefits of these the the the organic magnesium may be that it's consistent. It's always going to be this variable.
(56:01) Um it's going to have a solubility and so the consistency is a big benefit of magnesium sulfate but again the sulfate ion is something we don't want in lactating cows. So it would have the benefits of consistency and not the problem with the the sulfate uh counter ion. All right. Very well. Anything else, folks? All right.
(56:29) Well, then I want to I want to announce a promotion. I don't know if you guys noticed, but I've been uh drinking my bourbon from a Real Science Exchange glass, and Bill is drinking from a Real Science Exchange uh beerstein. And so anybody that goes out and gives us a five-star review uh and a comments on on Apple, the first 100 that does that and send us sends us a screenshot to an&h.
(56:56) marketing balm.com, I'm going to send you off uh either your choice, bourbon glass or or beerstein. So >> do do you have a Mountain Dew glass? >> No. No Mountain Dew, Stephen, >> and coffee. A coffee mug. We needed to. Yeah, >> that'll be next week. >> Next. >> All right. Very well. Um, we'll call last call then.
(57:19) Uh, what I'd like to do is just kind of go around the table and have each of you kind of share what were some of the key takeaways that we ought to take from the conversation today. And uh, Maria, as uh, our very very first co-host, I'd like to start with you. Our last call question is sponsored by Aminoure XM precision release methionine.
(57:41) The next generation in amino acid balancing. With Aminoure XM, you can save up to 5 cents per cow per day on your methane investment. Try it today and receive an additional 2.5 cents per cow per day savings with Balm's limited time rebate offer. Contact your BCM representative to learn more. I think uh Scott is a very good conversation because it's all all about applied knowledge right not only to be based on science but to know how to apply that and this is I I would say our mission here in the industry so this is my my main takeaway to know how to apply
(58:21) all the science that we have behind us. >> Yep. Great point and uh Bill we want to thank you for that. Why don't you uh kind of give us your key takeaways? >> Well, tra trace mineral nutrition is complicated, but the the bottom line is feed enough, but don't feed too much. And so, it's nom isn't enough.
(58:43) You're going to be above that re a modest amount above that. Consider antagonist. Sulfur is the probably the biggest one you have to worry about for for all the all the metals. the benefits of these these uh non the the the organics high quality organics I think is consistency of of availability and and and again I think there's some a lot to be learned on effects of microbiome bruminal and intestinal um so I think that when you start looking at all these other potential benefits you can afford to feed to not feed sulfates I I just have have I 10
(59:22) years ago I said sulfates are fine. I'm I'm souring on them because of all these nonmineral effects we're seeing there. So, >> all right. Thank you for that, Bill. Stephen, as featured guest, you get the last word. >> All right. So, agree with Bill. U trace mineral nutrition is is complicated. I think, you know, utilizing good quality organic trace minerals and, you know, and really emphasize that.
(59:51) Make sure you get get good quality organic trace minerals from from from a reputable company. Particularly, you know, I know it's it's particularly in trying economic times, it's it's very tempting to to try to go with something a little bit a little bit cheaper. Uh but sticking with those reputable companies will pay off dividends in the long run.
(1:00:11) So good organic trace mineral, you know, can help with some of those antagonistic um effects, limiting some of those antagonistic effects and and help provide the mineral nutrition that they that the animals need. >> All right. Thank you, Steve and Bill. You guys have been great uh great guests. Appreciate your expertise.
(1:00:30) Maria, great co-host. We'll have you back. Uh and welcome to Balkim. Uh to our loyal audience out there, thank you as always for coming along with us on this journey. I hope you learned something. I hope you had some fun and I hope to see you next time here at Real Science Exchange where it's always happy hour and you're always among friends.
(1:00:48) Cheers. Cheers. We'd love to hear your comments or ideas for topics and guests. So, please reach out via email at anh.marketingbell.com with any suggestions and we'll work hard to add them to the schedule. Don't forget to leave a fivestar rating on your way out. You can request your Real Science Exchange t-shirt in just a few easy steps.
(1:01:14) Just like or subscribe to the Real Science Exchange and send us a screenshot along with your address and t-shirt size to an&h.marketing atbalm.com. Balm's real science lecture series of webinars takes place on the first Tuesday of every month with the top research and nutrition topics that will impact your business. We also include small ruminant, monogastric, and companion animal focused topics throughout the year.
(1:01:39) Visit balm.com/realcience to see the upcoming topics and to register for future webinars. You can also access past webinars and search for the topics most important to