Manure Evaluation: Figuring Out What’s Going on Between Cows & Their Rations with Dr. Mary Beth Hall - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=teuCBPL5-VA

Transcript:
(00:11) Welcome to the next generation in chelated minerals. Introducing new Khir Plus amino acid chelated minerals from Balm. Kishir plus delivers a higher concentration of mineral with a superior amino acid profile. The higher mineral content adds formulation flexibility, opening up space in the ration and also reduces the carbon footprint.
(00:34) The superior amino acid profile delivers 28% protein from microbial biomass. The Kishir Plus line also offers a granulated form for improved handling characteristics and reduced dust. Visit balm.com to see how new Kishir Plus can deliver the added benefits you need to improve performance and reduce manufacturing hurdles.
(01:00) Hello everyone and welcome to the real science lecture series. My name is Scott Surell, director of global marketing here at Balkim. Today we welcome Dr. Mary Beth Hall from the cows are always right LLC to help us figure out what's going on between the cows and their rations. And we're going to do that by looking at their manure. Dr.
(01:19) Hall is the owner of the cows are always right uh dairy consulting business where she uh um councils with producers to improve uh feeding and profitability. She was formerly with the USDA and uh uh at the dairy forage research center Wisconsin. She was there for about two decades. She holds a PhD from Cornell University in animal science and she now resides in rural Wisconsin with her husband and I hear also with a pack of dog and dogs and we may have to talk about that.
(01:50) Mary Beth, Mary Beth, this is uh not your first time to the lecture and you've wandered into the real science exchange pub a couple times. So, welcome back. It's it's it's good to have you here again. I I must say you've we've had a lot of people cross uh across our stage and and you're one of my favorites. Um, before we get started, I I want you to talk a little bit about the name of your company, The Cows Are Always, Right.
(02:14) How'd you come up with that? >> Well, first things first, Scott, it's a pleasure to be black back black back on the Real Science Exchange. Um, and know, and for the record, despite the fact this used to be a a a sort of pub deal, this contains water at the moment. Um, the cows are always right. Why on earth would I name an LLC that? Um, after working in extension as a county agent way back when when I started in the industry and then working in extension and research as faculty at the University of Florida, one of the
(02:53) things I figured out was that when you walk a herd, when you're trying to understand what's going on, don't assume that you know. you you've got to look at the cows because they are going to tell you exactly what's going on. So even with people's best efforts, the cows are the ones that are always right.
(03:13) And if we got to the point where we were suggesting that they weren't, we had to rethink what was going on. It um it's the one it's the one thing I'm sure of whether it was research extension or trying to help farmers do a better job with their herds. >> Yeah. Excellent. So you were at USDA, now you've got your own shingle out.
(03:31) uh tell people how uh they can get a hold of you. >> Okay. On the first slide that we have, you can get a hold of me. Um easiest thing is by my email address. It's mbh l cirr.com. The cows are always right.com. >> Excellent. >> Glad to hear from folks. >> Yeah. Good. Well, looking forward to your presentations. Please proceed.
(03:59) >> We'll do. Thank you. Okay. So again, Scott and Balkam, thank you very much for having me here today for this presentation. And yes, the title is manure evaluation, figuring out what's going on between cows and their rations. And when we think about what we're looking at in in life or on farms, you know, normal, put that in quotes, is what we get used to.
(04:30) But in truth, we got to figure out whether normal what we've gotten used to is what we really want or if there are things we can look at that might give us hints about how we can improve on the situation. And especially when we're walking farms, um our goal is to get enough information in context from enough different angles to make sense of the situation.
(04:57) And so, all right, evaluating a herd, what we're accustomed to doing. We look at the cows, their body condition score, their coats, their uh lameness scores, whether or not they're ruminating to the degree we think they should. We look at the feed. Is it moldy? Is it dusty? Do we have analyses on it? Is it consistent or is it variable over time for what the cows get? Is it well mixed? And I say existence, that goes to the feed bunk.
(05:25) Is there feed there in front of the cows or are they going part of the day without anything to to try and eat? We look at the bunks. Is it moldy? Is it clean? Is it fresh? Is it heating? Is it mixed? Is again, is there way back? We look at the water. Is it clean? Is it fresh? And is it available for the animals? Um I've seen enough water tanks that look like they had their own ecosystems going and and that's not high on the list.
(05:55) the facilities, are they comfortable, are they clean, are they ventilated? The employees, how are they interacting with the cows and the cows with them? And then finally, we have manure. It we evaluate this too because no, manure does not just happen. There's a lot of things going on between the biology of the cow and her diet that decides how this stuff turns out.
(06:22) So in context, manure gives insights to the interaction between the cow and the diet. And again, remember the cows are always right. So this is one more thing to look at. Now manure starts in the diet. So we're going to start back at the diet. Um physically effective fiber is actually really important for how manure ends up looking. Uh it increases rin function.
(06:50) It increases rumination. It affects rin retention and passage. And it reduces the risk of digestive upset. Essentially, physically effective fiber can allow diets can allow the rations to work. And when we're looking at physically effective fiber, we want material that's coarse enough to keep the animal chewing, but not so coarse that they can sort.
(07:19) And so when you look at the feeds that we have where you might get effective fiber, typically the physical form is going to be best for effective fiber when we're looking at any of our forages. Um like here I have alalfa salad, corn salad, and wheat straw. And when you compare the particle sizes with those to our byproducts, even sugar beet pulp or ground corn, the lower pictures there, all of those materials are really finely ground all old.
(07:50) Even if they're high in fiber, the NDF, the fiber can dilute the amount of other components in the diet, but it's not going to give the physical form that would get cast to chew and would affect some of the rin function. I mean, so you you take a look at physical form in the rin and the rin is where we start off to after the feed in what manure is going to look like.
(08:19) The larger the forge particles are, the they can make a mat that holds feeds in the rin. And gradually through rumination and mostly rumination but also microbial digestion those particles get broken down until they're of a size that they can pass readily out of the rin. Now those bigger particles can allow a long this mat that can hold particles in the rin can allow them to be retained there longer so that they can be more extensively fermented.
(08:52) that gets us microbial protein uh organic acids and such. The time they spend in the rin also affects how small those particles become because that's the period of time that they would be subject to rumination and that type of particle breakdown. So when you look at the rin that ends up determining what gets out of the rin undigested and passes through the rest of the gut and what particle size goes from the diet to potential breakdown to passing out and goes to the rest of the gut.
(09:31) I mean, so where we start out is with rin fermentation, we've got for where feed digests in the rin protein and carbohydrates have the potential to be digested. When feed passes to the small intestine, only true protein from the feed or from microbes can be digested there. starch but not fiber and also fats, lipids.
(10:02) Once things get past the small intestine, they'll go to the seeum and large intestine where we run into a fermentation. Again, it's like the fermentation that goes on in the rin, but it's not so well buffered. And there again, the microbes in that hind gut can digest protein and carbohydrates to some extent.
(10:24) and where different materials get digested in the gut. The sight of their digestion affects what manure looks like. So you take a look at the two compartments for fermentation, the rin and the seeum and large intestine and what we see and let's see I'll get a laser pointer here. Okay.
(10:51) When we have organic acids produced by the microbes by fermenting carbohydrates particular in the rin they can be absorbed in the hind gut they can also be absorbed out of the gut and they'll provide energy to the cow. When we look at microbial protein production when it's produced in the rin those bugs can die and recycle there or they can pass down to the abom and then to the small intestine and be digested and absorbed and the cow gets microbial protein from that.
(11:25) If that microbial protein the microbes are grown up and produced in the hind gut they end up out in the feces. They no nutritional value to the cow. Gases that are produced carbon dioxide and methane happen both in the rin and the hind gut from fermentation. And if they're produced in the rin she either belches them out erectation or she bloat if they're not released.
(11:51) When they're produced in the hind gut they end up going out with the feces. Okay. So depending where that fermentation happens, it affects what nutrients the cow gets and also affects what the manure looks like. A shift in the sight of digestion from the rin to the to the large intestine and seeum changes the nutrient supply and causes some of the symptoms of ruminal acidosis and digestive upset.
(12:26) If things aren't being fermented in the rin like they should and they're being fermented here, that's where we get some of these signs that we look at that say we got a problem. So now now we're going to go through a whole series of slides looking at just what manure looks like. Um again, it doesn't just happen.
(12:49) So here we start with the good stuff for a lactating herd. It's soft, but it forms up. And Mike Hutchkins used to talk about these as double dippers. Um, they're not too loose, they're not too firm, and things, at least on the surface, look pretty well digested. But here we get into some of the stuff that's not normal.
(13:13) It's when you get this foamy material that you can see it's full of air bubbles. This goes back to excess fermentation in the hind gut that created acid and gas. And sometimes it comes out just about looking like shaving cream. Um, this is not normal. The feed didn't digest. It's an indicator that a goodly portion of fermentable feed didn't ferment, didn't digest where it should have.
(13:45) Diarrhea, not normal. That's when we have this really loose material that comes out and just splatters. Um, it can be a sign of ruminal acidosis or digestive upset. Things didn't ferment well in the front end of the gut. They fermented extensively in the hind gut and you got this. You can also get it if animals are eating spoiled feed.
(14:12) Um, in that ca and also it can be caused by disease. Think winter dysentery. spoiled feed. Once upon a time when I was at University of Florida on faculty and running a research trial out at the farm, the herd manager came up to me and said, "Dr. Hall, did you formulate the diets to reduce milk production?" And I told him, "No, that hadn't been I hadn't done that on purpose.
(14:40) " And so I I went out and I walked the cows. And what I was finding is there was manure in that pen of cows that were on Kalin Gates. The manure looked perfectly fine. Then other manure that was just loose diarrhea. And then I went to the front of the bunk and I saw these clumps of spoilage there. And then I went and I looked at our bunk silo and what had happened was that we were towards the back end of a drive over pile of silage and some of the spoilage hadn't been cleaned off.
(15:12) And I figured odds were whatever cow drew the short straw and ate this was the one that was getting sick. And so when they cleaned off the bunk silo to get rid of the spoilage, all of a sudden the cows came up in milk. We weren't seeing diarrhea. And I look like a much better nutritionist. Undigested feed that's in the manure is also not normal because eaten doesn't mean digested.
(15:41) Um, and so when you start seeing chunks of corn like this coming through, go back and take a look at how finely ground the corn grain is. Um, it's these sort of pieces on the on the on the larger particles that are being held on the screens that usually come out here. And then you have to figure out did it come from the corn grain which you can get ground more finely dryish high moisture corn that might need to be ground more finely or was the corn not properly processed in the corn silage and it was on the dry side.
(16:16) That last one you're going to have a problem with going through the rest of the year unless maybe you make sure your physically effective fiber is adequate to hold it in the room and to be better digested. I mean that's the other thing. It's the grind here and it's also the total rin function.
(16:34) Was the feed held in place long enough so that it could be digested? Now, another thing that has come up here with seeing large particles in the manure undigested feed is when animals slug feed. they take if there's overcrowding at the bunk. If animals are eating most of their feed as quickly as they can because they're afraid that they will not be able to get more later perhaps with slug feeding you can get more material passing through as well.
(17:09) Okay. Uh also not normal is obviously undigested. I mean, you're not supposed to be able to identify feed that's in the manure. Um, I've seen whole linted cotton seed in manure with the lint still on it. Um, citrus pulp. We'll get into siving manure that was still orange coming through.
(17:29) And here you can see a sheath from a piece of corn silage. This is piece of grass that cow nibbled that came through green. I mean, and here's another piece of silage. Um, if you're dealing with something like sorghum, you might expect to see little BB's coming through the seeds undigested. That is normal. Um, with very high producing cows who are eating a lot of feed, you might get the occasional particle of corn salad stalk or alphalfpha stem coming through.
(18:00) But to see things like this, you want to make sure you've done what you can to avoid this because this feed didn't make had even have the chance to make milk. It only had the chance to make manure. More not normals. You get this pasty, clumpy material that just not right, splattered like this. kind of like diarrhea but in an occasional spot or in the herd if it's way too dry and clumping like this and you can see that there's grain that came through.
(18:37) Um, not normal for a lactating cow. And I'd say the pasty and the splatter not normal for anything. Also not normal is when you have a group of cows that are supposed to be getting the same diet. Their manure should pretty much all look relatively alike except maybe for 5% of the cows. Cows eating the same diet should have similar manure.
(19:04) And if they're not, are they sorting their feed? If they're overcrowded and slug feeding, is that affecting things? You have to go look and figure it out. or not normal mucin cast. When I first saw these, I I wasn't quite sure where they were coming from. Um I but they are coming out in the feces. They are not mucus per se that that you'd think was be coming out of the vagina.
(19:35) Um if you pick these up and you rinse them off in some water, they end up looking like sausage casings. They're a sign of past damage in the large intestine. And they can be brown, gray, or almost black. They can be really long pieces, or they can be in shreds. And I tell you what, one way that you can take a look for these when you're walking a herd is if you drag the toe of your boot across a manure pile and something moves after your toe goes by, it's probably one of these.
(20:05) If it's not, back away from the manure pile fairly quickly because Lord knows what it is. Um, but okay, focusing on what kind of damage we're talking about. Um, this is some work that was done by Henrikson at all. And this is the lining of the large intestine. This is normal where the cells migrate up and they gradually end up sloughing off when you have excessive fermentation in the hind gut.
(20:34) And potentially these can also come from um from toxins, lipopolysaccharides. What you have is the top layer of the epithelium, the cell covering of the intestine gets destroyed and it's at this point that the animal oozes or secretes mucin out to cover that and then the then that mucin cast gets shed some days later.
(21:02) um have never yet been able to find out when does the damage occur versus when we see the mucin cast but it indicates probably that you have too much hind gut fermentation and possibility of endotoxins. Okay, another thing that's not normal, the the mucent casts are really pretty easy to destroy, but fibbrin casts are tough. Um, they're a lot tougher in texture and they're rarer.
(21:33) Um, the only time I've seen them is when a cow was eating moldy cotton seed holes and got quite the dose of them. Um, it's still a sign of past damage to the large intestine. Okay, now we're going to get into manure screening. And this is something got into down at University of Florida. Here we had cups to be able to collect samples, gloves, um Sharpie marker to label the cups where they came from, a kitchen sieve, um with 1/16th or 1.6 mm openings.
(22:08) It's about 8 in or let's see, maybe about 16 cm 16 to 20 cm across. And with these kitchen screens, if you take it out of your kitchen, don't put it back. For collecting samples in a pinch, you can use a red beer cup and just put a glove over the top so it doesn't tip over as you're carrying it or you don't worry about it.
(22:35) But look at particle size. What you end up doing is you you rinse your manure sample into that kitchen sieve and then you end up wiping your hand around the inside as you're rinsing the material through. This keeps the civ from plugging. And what is coming out the bottom are the micro microbes that are in there.
(23:00) Any particles that are really really fine that can pass through the sie. This can include quite a bit of fiber as well, and that is normal. So, what you've got when you're finished are cleaned up particles so that you can see what actually came through in the manure. And by the way, for differences in the amount of solids you get out of a given amount of manure, the differences in the amount of solids in the set volume of manure reflects differences in the amount of gas or liquid in the manure.
(23:34) and how much passes the screen. Uh, and the easiest way to end up cleaning off one of these screens is just to flip it backwards and rinse it off for whatever you do. Do not let it dry or it'll be miserable to get clean again. So, this is the kind of thing you can see when you rinse out the the feces through a screen.
(24:00) These two sets of manure came out of like the first 30-day fresh group in a herd that I was walking. This on on your left is fecal particles that came out of a really good looking pile of manure. It looked normal for a lactating cow. And when you see part ah and by the way this was on a ryrass silage diet that the animals had been on.
(24:28) Both of these cows were on the same TMR. These really fine particles coming through would suggest good rumininal retention and better digestion and better rumination. So you got the particles that fine. When you take a look at this this bad sample showed up in a pile of bubbly diarrhea. Okay, it was liquid. And you see how large these particles are? Something is wrong.
(24:57) um they weren't retained in the room and long enough to get digested and ruminated and this is not good. This is a sick cow that you got to figure out what's going on when you look at and by the way the penny is here that did not come through the cow. That's just for an idea of particle size relative to everything else. Here's a here's feces from a diet that was really on the short side in roughage in in physically effective form.
(25:31) It only had about 19% corn silage, 5 1/2% cotton seed halls, and 9% alalfa hay. And you see there's all sorts of coarse particles in here. And even whole cotton seed that came through with the lint still. I don't mind seeing whole cotton seed come through black with the lint digested off of it, but it if it came through like this, it means it wasn't held in the room and long enough.
(25:55) You don't want to see lots of particle lots of particles in the manure that are bigger than a half inch or or about 2 cm long. Okay, this um again really coarse material coming through more undigested feed and it was found in a pool of bubbly di bubbly diarrhea. And what blew me away is this piece here. This piece of grass hay that came through intact.
(26:32) That's a sick cow. and we got to figure out how to fix what's going on in her rin. Okay, before corn processors were popular, we were seeing this. Now, corn grain that isn't ground at all is really kind of smooth and can slide through. But here you can also see a corn silage leaf that came through still green.
(26:54) you weren't getting the ruminal retention and you weren't getting the nutritional value out of these feeds that the cow needed to make milk and just to support herself. And in this case, I mean, this was coming from the silage, so there was no repairing it that year. Um, we ended up getting an increase in milk production when we added ground corn to the ration to make up for the starch that was not being digested in the corn grain coming through.
(27:23) Okay. So, as we're walking the cows to look at manure, you get an idea of the variation, okay? You you don't just pick out the good stuff or the bad stuff. You go into the groups and you take three or four samples and and bring it back for screening and evaluate what's going on in the whole herd. You look between groups and between rations.
(27:47) So, four to six pies per group for particle size. And remember, about 5% of the manure will not look like the rest. And one thing you'll notice from this picture, this particular cow here who is walking away was practicing her cursive writing skills. All right. Um, that's not exactly what you want to see either, but again, any of this is going to need context.
(28:12) manure probably varies somewhat over 24 hours and there's no way to know exactly the amount produced to precisely quantify what you sampled. Um, you know, when you're looking at manure, just remember it's manure. It it's not rocket science. Um it's qualitative in to my take it's qualitative and what you end up needing to do is looking at what's there looking at the cows and going back and understanding what's going what might be going on in the gut that would give you these kind of results.
(28:47) So walking the the herd and getting context just remember the cows have very few hobbies and so if they're given the opportunity they're going to sort their feed. If you look in the feed bunk and you see holes that cows have dug like this, refer to them as cow holes, you'll watch animals put their nose down, move it back and forth, and then dive to the bottom.
(29:12) And they're typically sorting their feed for grain because the grain is going to be most dense and drop to the bottom. So, what you need is a moist enough diet to try and hold that together. And also don't give them really long pieces of forage because they can readily sort those out. Now Lou Armano, Dr. Lou Armano from uh University of Wisconsin came up with the notion that if a piece of forage is longer than a cow's mouth is wide, she can sort it.
(29:42) So that also means, mind you, that heers can probably do a better job of sorting than mature cows can. So, what you want is to cut these large particles down to maybe 1 to 2 in long. So, maybe um two to two to five centimeters long to and mixed in a moist diet to get the cows to eat it. You also need to make sure the diet is properly mixed.
(30:10) Um, in this case, the cows were being helped in their sorting by the alphalfpha hay not being properly mixed with the rest of the TMR in this partially mixed ration. So, this cow was eating the alphalfpha hay and this cow was eating the rest of the TMR, not what the diet looked like on paper. You also take a look see because cows will eat more dirt, salt, or by carb when they have digestive upset.
(30:36) I don't think it's necessarily anything specific thereafter or I haven't been able to figure that out, but it means something's not right. Um, this area with sand in it was in front of the stalls over in this one barn I was working with and at the end of heat stress, the cows had eaten this down by about one one and a half feet.
(31:00) Something was not right in the diet or in their environment. and um needed some attention. When you're walking the cows, when you see Okay. Okay. Granted, these cows are are dirty. Okay. Please, please just move on from that. But you usually expect cows to just be standing with their tail hanging naturally. If you walk through a herd and you see them holding up their tails like this for an extended period after they've decated, not that it doesn't go back down fairly quickly, you're probably looking at either uterine infections or gut
(31:39) irritation that's keeping them holding the tail up. And that's one more thing to consider. Heat stress. Going from New York State down to Florida taught me a lot about heat stress. In New York State, at least historically, heat stress has been more theoretical than than something that that was anything close to being dealt with in a subtropical or tropical environment.
(32:06) Eat stress. I here I'm saying it causes digestive upset. Let me just say it participates in digestive upset. You have cows panting and decreasing the amount they're ruminating. They're drooling away by carb and saliva that should go to buffering their rin. They tend to slug feed. And I have never seen cows sort their feed harder than animals that are heat stressed.
(32:31) Best thing you can do here besides making sure you have a balanced diet that has adequate effective fiber and possibly less starch in it and adequate and more than adequate NDF um is cool the cows. That is really the only way to handle heat stress. So wrapping this up, when you're on the farm, you look at the manure, but you got to put everything in context.
(33:00) You have to look at everything and bring it all together. So you have a context. The manure appearance, fecal particle size, undigested feed in the manure, percent rumination, eating behavior, sorting or not, slug feeding or not. Look at the animal health, which includes hooves, product, their production, their feed efficiency, their environment.
(33:25) Are they comfortable? Can they lay down and rest? Are they heat stressed or not? and looking at the overall management um of the feed of the herd and you use these together to build a case as to what ration or management changes are needed. It needs to be brought all together to give you an answer that can lead you to understanding what the cows are telling you because the cows are always right.
(33:56) And so with that, I'd be glad to answer any questions. >> All right. Thank you, Mary Beth. Uh before we get started though with our Q&A portion, we'd like to share a brief video. Then we'll be right back to answer the questions you've submitted during today's presentation. Balkim has invested decades perfecting the art of nutrient encapsulation.
(34:25) And now, new Aminoure XL is setting a new standard, delivering 35% more metabizable lysine than leading competitors. With Amosure XL, you can provide your cows with a more consistent and higher quality source of metabizable lysine, leading to improved and more dependable results.
(34:48) A recent meta analysis found that feeding rumin protected lysine led to an increase in milk fat percentage and 4.4 four more pounds of energy corrected milk. Feed New Aminoure XL to your cows and have confidence that you're using the most consistent, reliable, and costeffective source of lysine on the market today. Learn more at balcam.com/xl.
(35:14) [music] All right, as a reminder, you can still submit questions through the Q&A tab at the top of your screen. Dr. Hall, our first question is let's go with uh saw one here from Dr. Park. Uh Dr. Hall, the recent focus on reducing methane emissions, can the gas space in the room and grow and force the liquid and solid fractions to be reduced? >> That is a very good question.
(35:45) You know what? What I [clears throat] what I would think and this is okay periodically when we go through these I might just abbreviate something with MBBG which is merry best guess. I mean what what we've got with the with any of our ruminants they're designed to belch out gases so that we don't build up pressure and get bloating in the rin.
(36:08) I'm not [snorts] when I've been doing room and evacuations on cows, I've been more accustomed to seeing the gas space reduced when a after an animal is eaten when the rin is more full. I never considered that the gas could apply pressure to get things to pass as opposed to being irrectated, belched out.
(36:35) um doesn't say it can't, but I I think the cow would have another way to get rid of that gas before it created problems, but I don't have firm information on that. >> All right. Very well. Another question from another one of my favorites, Dr. Mike Hutchkins. He'd like to know, "Do you measure fecal pH as a tool?" >> Okay. Um hi, Mike. Okay. Um yes, I have.
(37:02) And um one of the things you get to look at with fecal pH is if you have a dry cow, your fecal pH is actually a lot higher. It might be up around seven. As you have animals that are getting more grain in their diet and that are eating more, you do get you do have the potential for more fermentable material to pass down through the gut and be fermented in the hind gut.
(37:28) But that's normal. that that's not when we're seeing any of these nasty things that I showed you in in in photos. Um, when we get to the lactating herd, you might be down into the sixes. I have um possibly e even if things get really severe with um with fermentable material going through you might get a low pH but alternatively you might get a really high pH and that's with diarrhea dumping by carb.
(38:03) It's sort of like what happens with calves with diarrhea. They'll dump by carb into the gut and that'll pass out and that gives you a really high pH. I mean so you can yes I have looked at pH but in figuring out how to use it well as a diagnostic tool have have not been able to get there. And again something like diarrhea that has a more alkaline pH.
(38:29) It it seems counterintuitive to the basis for what we think is going on. >> All right. Very well. I've got a question here and I don't know Mary Beth if you can see the uh the questions or not but if you want to follow along this one comes in from Muhammad and I'll do my best to kind of make sure I do this justice but it it it appears that he's got some in some herds high producing lactating cows sometimes have a a sudden uh rin upset with signs of collic uh with left side bloat uh upon a rectum exam there's no dung or sometimes a
(39:02) pasty type of of of manure and there's a right side ping sound. Um, these cows have already been vaccinated for claustrdia and they have 100% tighter and he's wanting to know um why they have hemorrhagic bowel syndrome. So, I'm assuming that they were uh um diagnosed with that and he's looking for your guidance.
(39:27) >> Okay. One of the seed questions that I sent to Scott um was how specifically can you use manure to diagnose certain conditions? Okay. And you know because this question has come up before and but in terms of can you tell what micotoxin is creating havoc through looking at manure? Your question is a damn good one.
(39:56) I I guess what I'm looking at is [clears throat] that the manure evaluation gives you a general idea of what is going on. I don't know that it can tell you specifically what went sideways. A and I'm not sure that I've ever seen a good association made between hemorrhagic bowel and anything we were looking at manure.
(40:22) Not not to my knowledge. Um the one thing that has shown up is and I didn't cover it in my talk periodically and and this is when there is manure and things are not looking necessarily quite right and you're trying to figure out what's going on. You can find these masses of claylike stuff in the feces. It can be chunks.
(40:48) It can be small pieces. Um, I spent way too much time fishing through manure [laughter] and trying to figure out what these things were because because when you get them, they're like clay. There there's not much of any fiber, not much of any feed in them. It's it's this weird material. And I was at a conference in Michigan years back talking about manure evaluation.
(41:12) And a couple of veterinarians came up to me afterwards and said, "We know what that is." And what they were saying is it was evolving in the abom and it was being shed out from there. And then a friend who was a veterinarian in Florida, Carrie McGee, told me that when he was doing um when he was doing DAS, he would sometimes have to go to the abomment and work this material out that was just clumpy and whatever it was in there.
(41:49) And all I'm thinking is if you've got problems with gut stasis, if you've got problems with gut dysfunction and you're allowing abomal secretions and microbial mass to build up there that eventually comes out, that might point to something in the feces that goes back to a specific part of the gut. But for the other things you describe, um I I don't know that we can get that specific in evaluating manure and making that connection or I don't have the information to do so.
(42:26) >> Yeah. Yeah. Thank you for that. Uh I don't like to get too commercial in these things, but I I will say Muhammad is that uh my friends at Fibro uh animal health has a product called Omnien that has been known to work for true uh hemorrhagic bowel syndrome. if that is in case exactly what you do have.
(42:44) So, you may want to contact them and see if they can help you out. Uh, next question then comes in from uh Dr. Zimmerman. Dr. uh Hall, what are the black specks in the manure on slide 16 of your presentation? >> Okay, those black specks are probably are that would have come from Florida. Odds are it was cotton seed holes or cotton seed holes whether it came from um whole cotton seed that got chewed up.
(43:14) Let's go back to slide 16. Uh oops. Okay. These black particles, those are going to be from cotton seed and those are broken up portions of the hull. The cottonseed hulls are typically about 20% lignon. So they are not very digestible. Um and so the cot seeing cotton seed holes in manure is perfectly normal. Ah, one thing about cotton seed holes um to to mention is that they help if you're feeding if you feed higher levels of cotton seed holes in some diets, they can help get material to leave the rin quicker and help push
(44:11) things out. And so you might start seeing more identifiable ground corn grain in the manure. Um, but they're a kind of unique feed and I've not seen that with with other with other feed stuffs. >> All right. Very well. Next question comes in from Hussein. He's got a problem with uh undigested fat coming through the manure.
(44:37) Uh, he's feeding a 100 gram of an 84% fat and 200 gram of a 99% fat. So, I'm going to assume one might be a calcium soap and the other one might be a hydrogenated uh fatty acid product. And uh wondering why that might be coming through in the manure and does it is is there um anything that we can learn about what how it's being digested.
(44:59) >> Okay. Well, let what I'd ask you to do is can can you translate that back to what percent of the diet is coming through as fat is one thing. And I think Dr. Zimmerman was also kind of weighing in with with an answer with that. Um, normally when we're feeding cattle, we look at maybe 3% unprotected fat, another 3% protected.
(45:28) I mean, we have some limits to how much we're going to feed to to make up for energy that we want in the diet or indigestibility and other things. And with that much fat going in, I'm ballparking it, but have you exceeded some some things we normally think of as limits for how much you put in there? I mean, the alternative is I'd throw this back to Dr.
(45:57) Adam Lockach and say, "Hey, what what is possible and what could limit that?" But Scott, from what you see, did did Clay end up answering something on that? I don't see it, but um if we could bring Clay on, I'd be happy to do so >> because it said something to the effect about he was answering. >> Okay. >> No, he did not answer.
(46:22) I just write in there that you're answering the question. Sorry. >> Okay, >> forgive. No worries. Clay, do you have an answer? >> I don't on that one. It is a good question is you know how much of it is actually coming through. >> Yeah. Yeah. I I have I have been in herds where the manure has this kind of oily glossy look to it and and the question was raised all right did that come from did that come from the fats that were fed? Um, I I would go back and make sure that you haven't exceeded some limits for how much we should be feeding in in the rest
(47:00) of the diet. I don't know what the limits are in the small intestine for being able to digest them. >> Yep. All right. Very well. Fred would like to know, is it normal for cows to shed a minimum of mucin casts or should they uh never be any? Never say never. Um I have I have walked herds where I found mucent casts in one plop of manure and everything else in the herd looked fine.
(47:34) Um it's indicative that there was damage. But if we go back to the idea that maybe 5% of the cows might not be like the others or something's offkilter, um I would prefer not to see it. I it is not normal but I don't think you can say if if you found it in one spot and everything else looked fine you got worried about it that this is why it gets really really important to put everything in context which also goes to are the animals looking healthy are they performing well is their feed efficient if you can get a dry matter intake
(48:12) number is their feed efficiency good um you got to put it in context and go from there. >> All right. Um, son would like to know, "What is the reason of a white layer on the top of some feces?" >> This Okay, this normally shows up after they dry, not while they're wet. and and I don't know why it's some of them show up white or or not it but again I'm assuming that it's not dried material because I've not seen that on fresh feces.
(48:53) Um I I think it's just a function of how they dry but I don't have anything more specific than that. >> All right, thank you. Tyler uh is asking, "What are your thoughts on seeing gelatinized starch in the manure? Is it always a bad thing? And you would you say when you see it, it's a result of too much starch in the diet, not enough physical effective fiber, or both? And is there any long-lasting negative effects to the cow with having uh prolonger hind cut prolonged hind gut fermentation? >> Good.
(49:26) >> A lot of questions there. >> A bunch of good questions there. Um I mean with gelatinized okay one of the things I did not hit on when we see rin problems in an animal talking to the veterary gastroenterterologists they say if a cow has rinal acidosis we expect her to have antitis inflammation in the small intestine.
(49:52) If you've got an inflamed small intestine, I mean, think about this. You know, starch getting past the small intestine. That's its job is to digest starch. So, you get the question, why is the small intestine failing at its job and the materials showing up in the hind gut to ferment and go out in the manure? Um, you know what what I would I would go back and look at physically effective form of the diet.
(50:22) um to retain things in the rin to maintain a whole variety of feeds in the rin so they can be digested. Working in Florida with heat stress put the fear of God in me about overfeeding starch, okay, and underfeeding fiber. And so what I the diets that I like to run and this is presuming decent decent digestibility of fiber um is running about 28 to 30% NDF running my starch between 25 and 28% and not trying to exceed those.
(51:04) If you're saying gelatinized starch, I I'm taking it this is from from high moisture or or on steam flake corn. Um I would go walk back around the front of the cow and try and find out what's going on and look at the diet and work from there. In terms of in terms of will this I mean will prolonged excessive hind gut fermentation be bad for the cow? Go back to the notion that it's not normal.
(51:36) We don't have everything dissected down as to how long can a cow put up with this. But there's been work that with horses with laminitis that suggests once you've given an animal an insult a a a nutritional insult in this case it can set them up for other pro future problems to be worse.
(52:01) They can be resilient once but not resilient repeatedly. Um, and if the excessive hind gut fermentation is related back to problems in the rin and what we've associated those with hoof problems, you've put the cow behind the eightball and you I guess the bottom line is get rid of the problem so her system can work properly. Um, I wouldn't I I unless there are some seriously extenduating circumstances on the farm, I wouldn't just shrug off some of these things as they'll get over it.
(52:41) I don't want to. One of our biggest jobs with cattle is getting obstacles out of their way so they can just do their job. And and I look at the excessive hind gut or the things that I've talked to you about today that look like excessive hind gut fermentation and suggest the rumin isn't working right or the small intestine isn't working right.
(53:03) I look at those as obstacles and our job is to get them out of her way. >> Good answer. Uh got a good one here from Steve says your call out of Dr. lock made me wonder if this recent highlevel feeding of hyleic roasted soybeans uh should we change any of our expectations on manure consistency? >> I don't know.
(53:31) I mean, one one of >> Yeah. One of the things with with roasted soybeans and hadn't thought about this before. Um typically with roasted soybeans, we don't grind them very finely. I mean, we're we're bringing down the particle size, but they're still on the chunky side. I mean, depending how finely you you process them. And if you do that, think think about this, you're protecting the verin from a lot of pre- oils, you're also getting those fats, those lipids to the small intestine where they can be used as such.
(54:13) Um, but if the whole portion of that soybean that contains that that oil is gradually being digested as it goes down the gut, does that leave things open to more oil actually getting all the way to the large intestine? And I don't know. I mean, we've gone after total track fiber digestibility.
(54:39) We've looked at total track starch digestibility. I wonder if anybody's looked at total track oil digestibility. That that would go back and play with your question. >> Yeah. Interesting. Got a uh one here from gentleman met. Do you have any experience with grazing herds or the things that we should look out for are different from housed herds? with grazing with grazing herds especi loose manure from grazing and loose manure from a TMR that is not right.
(55:20) Okay. I mean with with the amount of protein with the amount of water that's going through those animals especially on spring pastures loose is normal. Um, I was in New Zealand in early spring and um was pawing through manure in a Jersey herd that was out on pasture and it was interesting to me.
(55:45) You could see the only particles I could see were like the veins that were in the grass coming through and the manure was kind of slimy. And I looked at this and I was like, "Okay, rate of passage. It's coming through quick. Is this sliminess mostly microbes?" WI which says things are working but I'm not sure I have not looked for things that would get at manure composition um and more of the manure variability on pasture.
(56:17) You know, I have seen um in in a pastured herd where they were feeding they were feeding enough concentrate back at the milking barn that I was getting concerned for what the manure was looking like out on pasture and for what was coming through. Um, I would think you could take the basic principles that I talked through in in this and go out and look at grazing, but [clears throat] just recognize changing by by portion of the year as well for for what the manure will look like on pasture.
(56:53) Um, that there are some other things that are going to vary by time of the year, time of the growing season that can affect what you're seeing. All right, we have so many great questions. Uh, you're also getting a big shout out from Dr. Jones, so he he appreciates the summary and congrats on your new endeavor.
(57:15) Um, next one comes in from Colin. Would uh analyzing manure tell us anything? >> Okay, they I mean analyzing manure, they've been doing it for looking at starch digestibility. Um, you know, I I offer that probably manure varies somewhat across the day and I did notice a question in there that said that asked was there an ideal time to look at it and I'd say mostly when you're there um gets you away from your computer and gets you out amongst the cows which is another benefit of uh of looking at manure but looking at looking at manure for starch
(57:54) is something that's been um been more commonly done um and can give an idea idea of what is getting past the rin and the small intestine and might send you back to looking at how you end up processing the grain that you're feeding that's bringing starch with it. Now, okay, one an added benefit to um as I say getting away from in front of your computer.
(58:20) Again, this isn't this is manure. It's not rocket science. Farmers can look at the manure and look at how it changes with their animals. nutritionists, veterinarians, the the folks who are servicing the farm, the herd manager can look at the manure and use it to get into a conversation. And that I mean with the cows always being right, they're interpreting the cow and figuring out what to get how to work with her and all of them can be involved in the conversation with something they can see every day.
(58:56) and and I see that as another benefit to to doing this sort of thing. >> All right. Very well. Uh Will is asking, "What different things would you see in feces to differentiate rumin acidosis from excessive hind gut fermentation?" >> I don't think you can. Um one of the things you notice about the gut is it's all interconnected. Okay? I mean, I if you're if you're trying to, you know, when when I was first looking at at manure and walking herds and checking out rumination and and my basic baseline is 40 to 50% of any animals that are in sleeping, eating, drinking,
(59:42) or in heat should be ruminating. Okay. Um, what I end up doing is is looking from one end of the cow to the other and figuring if something's offkilter with the rin, it's going to erupt to everything else that happens in the rest of the gut. Okay? And so, you know, looking at the particle size and looking at the in the feces and looking at the rumination, that's one benchmark to to give you an idea that the rin isn't functioning the way it was supposed to.
(1:00:22) Um, I am against ruminosentesis. I hope I hope that's gone out of vogue. I have seen ruminal phes down into the fives in cattle that are healthy and productive. Um, and this is looking at with ruminally canulated cows. And I actually had a a veterinarian asked me once, so if the ruminosentesis comes out and it doesn't look bad, does that mean we don't have a problem? I I guess I'm looking at the cow observations and looking at the manure and looking at everything in context as a non-invasive way for getting at rin function, not just rumin acidosis,
(1:01:08) but rin function that will affect the animals health and overall performance and you're better off with that. Um, so I wouldn't look at it just as ruminal acidosis, though you can use every all the rest of this to buttress your case. That that might be where you're creating a problem. >> All right.
(1:01:28) I see that you're following along with the questions. Are there any that you've seen that we should answer that uh that I haven't asked? There's a bunch of them here still. That that's another thing. We're past the top of the hour. Can you hang on just a bit longer? >> I'd be glad to. >> All right. Uh, some of my first question any there that you'd love to answer that I haven't asked yet.
(1:01:49) >> See, >> I saw one from I think the gentleman's name was Dan. I'm looking for it. Uh, about a decision tree. Is there a decision tree that you would follow? an incision tree that okay this um you know kind of what >> no >> let me let me let me give you let me give you something else here instead of a decision tree and that was actually >> yeah might might explain my research as well um if you look at everything we just covered and the number of different things that that I said to look at.
(1:02:36) It's more like throwing out a net and you start tugging on the knot and seeing what else moves. You see you see how it covers the entire ground and then see if there if it looks like a place where the net needs repair. And I kind of did the same thing with my research. It's throwing out a net and seeing if I'm pull on this, what happens over here? it it's kind of a overused word holistic system for cows because one of the hazards of looking at manure is it can become a treasure hunt. Okay.
(1:03:14) Um you you can get looking for things that are interesting and actually dairy farms I worked with typically found out that if I found something interesting it wasn't probably good for them. um you you you need to take a balanced view. I mean you you integrate everything you you can or I haven't been able to to focus on just one thing and say this is the answer.
(1:03:45) You hone it down to to where you need to be. >> Great answer. Um, actually Dan, I'll go back to his. Uh, he was asking, "Can localized floor licking and manure water drinking in a small subgroup of cows indicate early Sarah or are there primarily environmental trigger trigger environmentally triggered behaviors? In this case, would buffer or salt blocks be an appropriate first intervention before ration changes? Don't you uh once once upon a time working going visiting a farm in California with a friend.
(1:04:22) I was watching cows drink out of this manure water and I was like what the heck? Um I and and my colleague who is who's a veterinarian didn't know quite was going what was going on with them either. I guess when we see animals [snorts] doing weird things and and they're doing them consistently, I mean throwing a salt block out there, so long as it doesn't create problems with trying to clean out the feed bunk, it's cheap and it can be indicative of what's going on.
(1:05:00) If you do that and and drinking that foul water goes by the wayside, call it good. Um, it's sort of like when cows start eating by carb or devouring salt or eating dirt. Um, something's wrong. And any of those things, we've typically said it was non-specific, something going on in the rin or in the gut.
(1:05:25) Um, I'd wonder if this is the same, but I do not know. >> All right. Very well. Uh, Dr. Jones has a a question. And can you reconcile the minor institute research on ration particle side versus size versus what gets to the rin as I think they find that all rations get to the same particle size after chewing uh thinking rate of passage versus ration particle size.
(1:05:52) >> One of the things that the folks at Miner tried to work on and Mike Allen uh Dr. Mike Allen of Michigan State tried to work on was forage fragility. I mean, how quickly does a feed particle break up so that the microbes can digest it better and so that it breaks down so it can pass? I mean, I don't think we have that nailed.
(1:06:21) I mean, so so you know, it the fragility is going to get to the question of how long does it take for a particle to get small enough to pass a and so another story. Once upon a time in Georgia, um I had been [clears throat] asked to go to this farm because the nutritional consultant was concerned because the farmer didn't want to buy any more forage and he saw problems in the herd.
(1:06:51) So, I'm walking the herd with them and loose manure. I mean, it not good until we got to the dry cow pen, which had one of these very bulky fiber richch diets. I mean, it had enough groceries in there to meet the cow's needs, but it was also a very bulky diet. Lot lot of lot of coarse fiber in it. [snorts] Last pen we visited was the fresh pen and the cows were there for week, two weeks and the manure I saw there ranged from looking like dry cow manure to looking like good lactating cow manure to being just as bad as the rest of the herd was loose and ugly. and
(1:07:36) I'm thinking they were feeding wheat straw in in the dry cow diet and discussions with Dr. Gabriela Varga, Penn State, we we went back and forth and it's like, okay, that fiber doesn't get reduced to nothing immediately. And so it's how long the fiber from the dry cow diet was still remaining functionally active big enough particle size to be Judinol and affect the rin mat changed when things went from dry cow manure to good dairy cow manure to bad dairy cow manure on this herd once they were switched to the herd diet. So, in
(1:08:17) trying to reconcile, we have some pieces that we don't have yet. We we we have some some things that would be great to measure that we don't have yet. So, so to reconcile particle size that we feed, first things first, keep them from sorting, but have it long enough so that they have to chew. And then understanding that that fragility of that particle that's going to affect how the cow chewing affects it and breaks it down is the next piece we need to know what we need to do to keep the rin healthy. I mean, how long is the fiber
(1:08:59) going to be effective once she eats it or does it get broken down really quickly? Like alalfa versus grass. alalfa comes down to nothing because the leaves just pulverize whereas grass it's the whole piece that really needs to be chewed. I mean both both stem and leaf. Um you ask a really good question and I think there are some other pieces that we need to add to it to know what to do with it.
(1:09:26) >> Sounds like you need to come out of retirement. Mary Bat, >> I've only alleged only allegedly retired. [laughter] All right, Victoria is asking, uh, what's your view on civ with two or three grids versus the kitchen civ for manure evaluation? I can go to the grocery store and get a civ. No, I the the several siv system that's out there.
(1:09:54) And it was really kind of funny because that came out at the same about the same time that I was working with with the kitchen s. Um, and actually my original civ was a window screen that had a hole in it from our house and I had it outside with with a hose and I had to yell at our and I'm going in to get something from the house and we had a black lab named Jake and I had dumped the manure out on the screen and the next thing I hear is my husband saying, "No, Jake, no.
(1:10:26) " Any rate, um part of my my manure sample was disappearing apparently. [laughter] But [snorts] what um what I think the three civ system does is it lets you take a look at different particle sizes for what's coming through. With the single civ, you're looking at it and trying to get a handle just as you see it in detecting what do we have here? I mean, so, so the one might let you get into more detail.
(1:10:59) Um, I for myself and for how I work with this, um, I haven't I have I've been able to work well enough with the single sooth, but that personal preference and what are you looking for? So, we're about 15 minutes over and we've still got more questions to go. But, uh, here's what and I I'll end with one question, but here's what I'm thinking, Mary Beth.
(1:11:29) I've been challenging my team to do a podcast with a live audience. This may be the one to try to do it with. There's so many good questions. Invite people on to come have a drink with us uh, as we do and and ask questions of the fabled Dr. Mary Beth. Cheers. So, we're we're going to end our time together here today with a question from uh Jorge.
(1:11:51) Um, an opportunity to evaluate the health or ration quality of cattle through the analysis of recognizable volatile components or smell in the manure. Thought that was an interesting one to to to end on. The question is All right. Well, I tell you what, okay, we we left the scratch and sniff tests off of the discussion on manure evaluation.
(1:12:17) You know, when I walk into a there was this one barn I walked into and the manure looked horrible. It was thin. It was pale and it smelled offkilter sweet. >> Okay. And turned out there was a bunch of meritis going through the herd. um you you walk into herds and I mean sometimes it's discerning what is the smell of the manure per se versus the ammonia that's permeating the place.
(1:12:46) I mean there there are other things that you can look to that help expand your questions. Okay, not that you know exactly what's going on, but you say this this is not what I'm used to to experiencing and can get you to look further. Now, you may not be able to find an answer on it, but you look for things that aren't the usual and then decide, are they important to the cow because that's the only one that counts.
(1:13:24) Um, or are we okay? and you monitor it over time. >> All right. Well, thank you, Mary Beth. And uh thank you everyone for attending today's webinar. If you have any questions, please submit them to ah marketingbalk.com. The real science lecture series continues with educational topics each and every month, including our next few.
(1:13:48) On February 3rd, we welcome Dr. Jackie Borman from Purdue University to share the impact of muscle depletion and accretion across lactation. And on February 17th, we'll be back with uh Walt Kulie on the real producer exchange as we take a deep dive into Skyler Garrick's farming operation in Arizona. Visit www.balim.
(1:14:13) com/realscience for details on future webinars and to register for upcoming events. Balkim's podcast series continues to offer a deeper dive into our webinar topics. Log on to your favorite podcast platform and search for Real Science Exchange or visit balkkim.com/mpodcast. And if you want a really cool Real Science Exchange t-shirt, just subscribe to the Real Science Exchange.
(1:14:37) Send us a screenshot along with your uh address and shirt size to ah.marketing balm.com and we'll get that off to you right away. And on behalf of Balkam and Dr. Hall, thank you for joining us today.