Manure Evaluation: Cows and Their Rations LIVE with Dr. Mary Beth Hall and Dr. Stefano Vandoni - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wRtFV9N8N4c

Transcript:
(00:08) Welcome to the Real Science Exchange, the podcast where leading scientists and industry professionals meet over a few drinks to discuss the latest ideas and trends in animal nutrition. Now, Clay, the audience member here have accused us in the past of talking manure, but today it's actually going to be true.
(00:30) Uh you know, so we got Dr. Marybeth Hall here. We're going to be talking about the presentation that she gave back in January titled manure evaluation, figuring out what's going on between cows and their rations. And so that that webinar took place back on January 7th. And if you've not heard that podcast or webinar, that was one of our more popular ones, honestly.
(00:55) Lots of questions. I would encourage you to go back and and listen to that. And you can find that again as on January 7th at Balchem.com/realscience.com. And again, I'd encourage you to go out there. Uh before we get started though, I'd like to introduce our guests. And first of all, Dr. Marybeth Hall, welcome. Not your first time to the pub.
(01:15) Appreciate you coming by. We'll just start off by telling us two things. Tell us a little bit about yourself and then tell us about the name of your company, The Cows Are Always Right. Okay. A little bit about myself. I only theoretically retired from USDA Agricultural Research Service back at the very end of 2024. But that before that, I was a county extension agent working with dairy farms. I worked on dairy farms.
(01:44) Um I was on faculty at University of Florida and learned a lot about heat stress and cattle. Um moved to USDA in 2004 so I could do work on carbohydrates and some of the has shown up in some of that has shown up in the ration evaluation things that you use today. Hopefully useful. And I currently live in Wisconsin with five rescued dogs and a very well-loved husband.
(02:15) So, there we have it. And the cows are always right. Once I theoretically retired, once I retired from USDA, if I was going to do work in the field, I needed to come up with an LLC name. And um The cows are always right is the one thing I know to be true. And so, that became the name of the LLC. And so, You know, the one thing that kind of intrigues me about that that the title there, it implies that there are things that are not always right, right? And that may be our processes, humans.
(02:51) And so, I think what it's really saying, right? The cows are a true reflection of biology, and biology's not easy. Yeah. At the end of the day, what And And this even goes to the manure Why do we look at manure? How the heck did I get involved in manure evaluation, right? >> going to ask that. We're going to get there. Um, you know, people do We do our very, very best to try and explain what's going on with the herd and understand what's going on so we can make it better or keep it good or or what have you.
(03:21) And so, whatever our computer programs say, you you still have to go back to the cows and not just the numbers that show up at a ration formulation, milk production, and the rest of it. You got to go check on the cows to see a whole You've got to walk the whole farm to get a sense of what's going on that'll inform where you need to go to next, whether it's due to management or anything else.
(03:51) So, yeah, you you got to go back to the couch. Yeah. So, Mary Beth, you got some pretty cool digs there where you're at. Where are you broadcasting from today? All right. I am deeply honored. Um, Andrew Rodger has allowed me to uh work and podcast webinar cast out of Phoenix Block Studio, his recording studio.
(04:17) And so, that is in Arnprior, Ontario, Canada. And so, with that, um, in terms of what beverage I'm bringing today, we have Labatt 50. And so, uh thoroughly thanking Andrew for his hospitality, um, including the beer. Yeah. Great. Well, thank you. And you you you answered my last question. I'm going to move on to the to the next gentleman here, Dr.
(04:42) Stefano Vandoni. Um, Stefano, this is not your first time to the pub, but I I'd like to start off uh kind of giving the reason why you're here today, right? You were How many How many years ago was it, Stefano, that you first came to the bathroom? >> 8 years ago. 7 8 years ago, um, Stefano is Italian.
(05:04) He works out of our Italian offices, obviously in Italy near Milan, where the the the winter Olympics are going on right now. And the very first time I met uh Stefano, he's giving a presentation to the team, and we were a good 5 10 minutes into this presentation, and I had no idea what he was talking about cuz he kept saying manure, manure.
(05:26) And and I was about to ask him, "What are you talking about, Stefano?" when I finally saw a a picture. Picture's worth a thousand words, right? And I oh, I understand. He's saying manure. And so, it's Stefano, it's only fitting that it's been a joke between us over the over the years, but it's only fitting that that you join us here today.
(05:47) So, you're you're a great colleague, you're a great tech service rep, and so thank you for joining us. Tell us a little bit more about about about yourself other than just your Italian accent. Well, as Scott said, I'm uh I'm Italian. I live very close to Milan. Uh so, well, it's 7 years more or less that I'm working for Balchem with a break, I would say, of a couple of year, and then I'm back since one one year right now.
(06:16) Um and I mean, I'm happy to be here, honestly, because I would say I have an intimate relationship with manure somehow, both of during my PhD studies, you know, we were doing a lot of studies on on beef, on coccidiosis, so I was taking a lot of samples. And then when I started to work in the industry as well, I was working a lot on feeding manure and and looking at how that can tell us something about the cows.
(06:47) So, I got I got some expertise on manure. That's That's weird to say, but but that's That's That's That's true. Yeah, I get Well, well, thank you for joining us. Look forward to the conversation. And then last but not least, Dr. Clay Zimmerman. Clay, it seems like it's been a while since we've had you here in the co-pilot seat.
(07:08) Tell us real quick a little bit about yourself, and wait, Stefano, I didn't ask, what's in your glass tonight? >> Ah, yeah. Um I'm drinking a gin tonic with a Japanese gin and and a Italian tonic. So, not too much gin anyhow. It's just more tonic than gin. All right, very well. Go ahead, Clay, sorry. I I jumped in there. Oh, yeah.
(07:34) So, I've been with Balchem 12 years now in different positions now, but uh uh my current role is I'm the I'm the director of science for our animal nutrition and health group and I also also manage uh the uh the US ruminant technical team. All right, very well. Um myself, I'm drinking a Basil Hayden Oh, yeah, Clay, go ahead.
(08:03) Uh I think you're I think you're muted, Clay. I think I am, you're right. I'm back to my standard today. I I have an angry orchard. All right, good. Saving. And what are you drinking, Scott? >> I've got I've got a Basil Hayden subtle smoke. So, looking forward to that uh in the conversation this evening.
(08:21) So, before we get started, I'd like to propose a toast. Here's to Dr. Mary Beth Hall and to manure, uh the original renewable resource. Cheers. Cheers. The economics of feeding Reassurance precision release choline. Reassurance fed during the transition period and because it's fed for such a short period of time, it costs just $15 per cow.
(08:50) And yet the benefits will continue to generate income throughout the year. Cows fed Reassurance produce 5 lbs more colostrum, which pays for your Reassurance investment on the very first day of lactation. Cows fed Reassurance also produce 5 lbs more milk per day, every day. That means after the first day, every day is payday.
(09:10) Invest in Reassurance during the transition period and recoup your investment on the very first day of lactation. After that, you got it, payday. All right, Mary Beth, let's now pry it in. So, I I do want to start off with a question. How did you get to be an expert in manure? That might be something you really want other people to talk about regarding how the heck um No, it I tell you what, okay, Florida taught me so much.
(09:48) I mean, when you come from New York State and you move to an entirely different environment, you have to recognize that you do not know what you're looking at. And and so as I was trying to understand what was going on with cows and herds, I started looking at manure. And um And and it and it went back to, you know, why the variability, what was good, what was bad.
(10:12) And this was in a time frame when some of the goals of uh formulating rations were to get the energy value right. And I was looking at cows that that had had diarrhea, and I'm thinking, this can't be normal. And heat stress and issues, this can't be normal, but what are we looking at? And so um I so to speak I dove in. Um it wearing gloves having cups to take samples of manure, pawing through it.
(10:48) And and I tell you what, one of the things that um that happens when you're looking at manure, people are wondering what the heck is a professor from university doing going and pawing through manure. I was in extension, so I was on farms. And and people started to get interested. And so when you're out there amongst the cows, you can also get in a variety of other conversations about what's going on.
(11:11) So, what got me into manure, so to speak, is trying to understand cows and helping the farmers and the people who work with the farmers, the veterinarians, the nutritionists, people from industry have a common language to talk about what was going on. That's what got me there. It was through my extension work.
(11:33) Excellent. Um now, we talked a little bit about the presentation that you gave back on January 7th. What were some of the things that uh big things that you wanted to communicate to the audience in that presentation? The big things I wanted to communicate were that when you're looking at manure, it that I know an alternate title to that talk is it doesn't just happen.
(11:58) Okay? So, what's going on in the rumen influences how manure looks, what's going on further down the gut and small intestine and large intestine influences how manure looks. And so, when you're evaluating what's there and what it looks like, its consistency and everything else, it can tell you how the rest of the gut is functioning, good, bad, or indifferent.
(12:23) And it can help you get a sense of what changes to make in diets, in management, in housing, or in feed, or not. It It gives you further insights that I think you can be hard-pressed to get any other way. Kind of proof positive. Yeah. >> But, interpreted interpreted in context, not all by itself. Yeah. So, after the the the webinar, there were a lot of questions, right? And it was obvious that and and and I went back over them today.
(12:55) There's a lot of questions. Well, what does this mean and what does this mean and what does this mean? I'm curious, is there a a guide out there? Have Have you created or anybody else, right, that can help people um right, learn about what's going on in the cow simply by looking at the output? Okay.
(13:14) There I've had a variety of articles out there with pictures. Um there was a University of Florida um basically extension publication that was two-sided and working with one of the companies, God bless them, they had it laminated. So, you could take it into the barn and um and and use it right there. Um we I do have that publication that I can make available to folks on websites as well if they if they'd like it.
(13:46) It has where they how things fermentation, digestion in different places matter, and pictures of what is normal, what is not normal and things to look for. Both looking at manure consistency and when you screen and rinse manure to see see some things more clearly that got out of the cow undigested. The you know, the lamination's critical cuz you have to wash the splash off, right? There and I mean, what I saw in one house, which is a little scary, they they can double as placemats, but but I'm not but but only use them in one spot, please.
(14:27) Yeah, I Okay, and to anybody listening, there's a reason when these conversations start, they send us to another back room in the restaurant. So, let's let's just go from there. Yeah. So, I have a question that and actually came in during during the during your lecture. It was from Mike Hutchins. It had to do with with fecal pH.
(14:50) So, Mary Beth, what are what are your thoughts about measuring fecal pH first of all? And how do you how do you go about getting fecal pH? >> you do this? We've collected a lot of information on fecal pH, but I haven't looked at it from the standpoint of how you use it to interpret good, better, and different on on on what's going on with the cows and their diets.
(15:17) Um I will tell you that dry cows will have a higher fecal pH. I mean, much lower starch diet, typically higher forage or fiber diets. And when you get into lactating cows, you'll get a more acidic pH. I mean, 6.5, 6.7. I've seen as low even down to the pH fives on cattle um with animals that look normal.
(15:44) But, you also get to wonder how that varies through the course of the day. I mean, to take a fecal pH, what you need to do I mean, if you add water to manure to get it to a liquid consistency to take a pH probe and put it in, that can change the pH of the feces of of the manure. So, what you want to do is take a pH probe, plug it in poke it in and stir it around in the feces so you get good contact.
(16:15) Um and then when the pH settles down, take take the pH, all right? And to clean that, what you need is if you have like a plastic container, something that won't break, that's full of water, you take that probe and swish it hard in there to get rid of all the feces, and then you use uh something like cheesecloth to dry it off before you go to the next sample.
(16:38) Um pH in general tells you that yeah, things got past the rumen and they fermented in the large intestine. As the pH goes down, you got more acid created there. But, I haven't I don't have data I don't have information to say there's a really fine line with how you interpret that. Now, um if you By the way, if anybody can tell, I've spent a lot of time with manure.
(17:09) Um what you end up finding is if you have animals with diarrhea, those pHs in that pool of diarrhea typically are really high. but that's cuz the cow is dumping bicarb into her large intestine and flushing things out. So, where you think it would be acid, not necessarily so. Um All right.
(17:31) What more do you want to know? Well, we we have a question that has just come in from Mike Hutchins if we want to bring him on to ask his question. Gladly. Yeah, it takes a little while. Well, Hi Mary. Um meantime, I have a question as well. Hi everyone. Hello Mariana. Introduce yourself, please. Sure. Um so, my name is Mariana.
(18:03) I'm a part of the tech team here in Balchem. I'm originally from Brazil as well. And I've been with Balchem for 6 months now. And it's a pleasure to be here today. Good. Um well, we were talking about pH and I was just wondering, does the rumen pH always reflect fecal pH or it depends? It depends on the diet or or any other uh you know, feature of the diet.
(18:28) Maybe physically effective NDF. That That's That's a very good question. Um you know, we at USDA um And by the way, to all of you out there, if the work I talk about that came out of USDA or Florida or whatnot is of value to you, go back to those institutions and tell them you support the work they do, okay? Um while I was at USDA, I was curious.
(18:59) Did Did physically effective fiber source end up affecting What did it affect? I mean, so um we fed diets with two different effective fiber sources put in at the same level of NDF, okay? And some things could substitute about one to one and had dry ground corn or high moisture corn. So, you were seeing both rate of starch fermentation and different effective fiber sources.
(19:27) And the first one we ran, we used chopped straw and we used chopped and siloed corn stover. Okay? And what would you Okay, and we looked at rumen pH. We We looked at a lot of things, but we looked at rumen pH and we looked at fecal pH. Between the straw and the corn stover, which do you think would give the higher rumen pH? I would think that would be the straw intuitively, just because I think the fermentation will be would be less.
(20:00) But, yeah. >> What? Okay, this is sort of a trick question and you give the same answer that I came up with. Um what what we ended up dealing with was that the rumen pH was lower with straw and higher with corn stover. And when we've got to the feces, the rumen pH was high Looks Let me get See if I got this right.
(20:29) Lower in the rumen, it was lower with straw and it was higher with corn stover. When we got to the feces, it was the reverse. That the fecal pH was higher with straw and lower with corn stover. And what we figured is and rumination didn't differ between them, okay? The straw was holding material in the rumen longer so that it could be fermented.
(20:54) And that allowed more acid production in the rumen. And so, there wasn't that to be fermented in the hindgut when it got that far. Okay? And so, the corn stover was letting things out of the room and sooner. So even your effective fiber source was going to have an impact on where things fermented. Now, all of the pH's that we had, nothing bad for the cows. Not at all.
(21:19) But it says that we've got a difference in even how our effective fiber sources work. Whether they're straw and holding things or corn stover and letting things out. So Mike, what you got? What is up? I think I'm live. Can you hear me now? Yeah, we can hear you, Mike. Welcome.
(21:43) I I have a question for you and that is measuring the screens. Um at one time you were using a number 16 screen and you can explain that to the people. I use a number eight and a number 16. That's my first question. Then the other question Wait, wait, on what? Manure. Washing manure. Go ahead. Okay. So those are my two screens I use to wash manure, but I also have a Cargill manure washer.
(22:05) And I'm curious on what you do with the Cargill manure washer. That's a three screen system and um and I I use that as well. I'm not quite sure what to do when we wash the manure with it. So a question for you is what are you seeing with What what are you doing with screening screening manure? What screens are you using and what do you think of the Cargill manure separator? Okay.
(22:27) I'll tell you where I started out with screens. Originally, my first effort at screening manure, okay, Mike, first things first, thank you for a very good question. My first effort at screening manure, I brought samples home. I've got a really understanding husband and um and I had a window screen that had a hole in it.
(22:49) And I went in to get um something so that I could add water and rinse the manure through the window screen just to for an opening volley. And the next thing I hear is my husband outside yelling, "No, Jake, no." That was a Labrador. I had left the manure sample unattended. Um moving along to what I went with for working in the field.
(23:15) This is before Cargill came out with his screens or anything, and what I ended up using was a kitchen screen with like 1/16 inch openings, okay? It was what was available to me. And I'll tell you up front, if you take it out of your kitchen, don't put it back, okay? Just don't, all right? So, I I ended up using that screen cuz it was available to me, and my sole interest with screening manure was just to see what particles that were there cuz I Cargill has done a lot to develop a system to take a look at what amounts
(23:53) and what on different screens mattered. What I was looking for were what were the size of the fiber particles that came through. Did undigested feed come through that held up on that screen? I I was trying to get a handle on things that wouldn't have been chewed so finely that by all rights, that fiber and everything passed through the screen.
(24:15) That that wasn't my concern. Um so, interpretation of the others, I would have to leave that to what the companies have come up with. I I can't speak to it. I was using something strictly qualitative that when you stood there with the dairy farmer, with the veterinarian, with the nutritionist, with who with the farm crew, you could explain what you were looking for and why this might matter for affecting cow performance.
(24:44) It I was I was going very simply. Yeah, I I used a lot the uh I think the Penn State particle separator for manure in the past, but as I'm aware, there are not really values for for the three screens. What I was looking is basically if there was an improvement over time, uh like having less in the top screen, more in the bottom one.
(25:13) Uh that But, I never had really a a proportion like we have for the TMR, for instance, that we know there are values or ranges that you have to hit on the different screens. Uh But, yeah, I agree with you, Mary Beth. I I have a couple of question if we can step back a little bit to the uh analytical of manure because I've been always concerned about measuring starch content on farm.
(25:43) Um and there are system now that can, based on NIR, that someone is using on farm as well. So, my first question is what do you think about measuring starch content in manure on farm? And if you believe in that, what should be the size of the sample that you would like to have for that? And the second question is what is your opinion about this NIR system? Are they reliable for measuring uh uh chemical components of manure or not? I will tell you what that I am not I do not have the information particularly to
(26:22) answer your last question. I I've not looked at at how appropriate they are, how how close they are to to what might be found otherwise through through chemical analysis. Um when it comes to I mean, the the looking at looking at the starch content of manure can be useful if it gets above a certain level, right? And and I can't give you that cutoff.
(26:49) This is That's not where my work is focused. I mean, and actually, I'd bring that into a discussion here for for other input. What I would refer to is what Mike Hutjens has done historically for getting people to screen corn to make sure the particle size is fine enough so that it has potential to be digested in the first place.
(27:10) Because what you typically see coming through in the manure or that would be of concern coming through in the manure is if you have pieces of fiber that are half an inch or longer, a lot of them, like uh a 1 to 2 cm long, you don't want to see that, not a lot. The occasional, fine. Um but when you start seeing the coarse grain come through that you can identify, and especially if there's a lot there, you walk back around the front of the cow and you look at what's in the diet and you look at what's in the feed bins and so forth.
(27:45) You can do something about that. If it's a corn source that you're feeding, you can grind it more finely. If it's your corn silage, that's where you get stuck because you get to deal with that till the next year. Yeah. And and that's where processing appropriate processing and trying to get the corn harvested when it's moist enough so that you can process it well be become important.
(28:10) Other other things you'd add to that? Nope. Oh, Sean's on. Yes, we've invited and invited Dr. Sean Richards on. Uh Sean uh uh has a question for you, Mary Beth. Please. Mary Mary Beth, you know, as usual, great great information. Um there's a lot of focus these days on rumination rate monitors and those sort of measures on farm.
(28:45) Have you Have you looked at the relationship between rumination rates and and manure? You know, what are your thoughts on these monitors and what what should we be targeting if you've got positive views on them? Prior to the use of those monitors, okay, and again, I have not worked directly with those monitors, only peripherally. Let's try that.
(29:10) Prior to providing those monitors, somebody was going to have to stand out in the barn. And the the original work what the the original ballpark for folks was you wanted Okay, in Florida, you wanted at least four or five out of every 10 animals that weren't sleeping, eating, drinking, or in heat doing their cuts.
(29:33) Okay? With those monitors, you've got a better chance for looking at a larger swath of the herd so long as you've got those monitors in place. I mean, there's about I'm thinking I was told once upon a time the cows have a union and they're not going to be chewing for more than 10 hours. I mean, if if you look Rick Grant has done some phenomenally good work on time budgets for cows and there's a limit to how much they can chew but I would end up associating rumination with making sure you've got the effective fiber level right, with
(30:08) making sure you have the total fiber level right. At fi fiber coming from forage in the ballpark of what you want. More than I've looked at it I mean, that's the first swipe there and then anything else is going to just be a function of if the manure isn't right, go back around to the front and see what else wasn't properly in place for keeping healthy cows ruminating on a healthy diet.
(30:39) I mean, it it it's all interlocking. Yes? Yeah, absolutely. And you know like you, Mary Beth, I you know, I spent a lot of time studying barns, counting cudding, counting number of cows counting. And it it's one of my frustrations that, you know, farms, certainly here in Europe, you know, a lot of them have these rumination monitors, but when you actually see that the manure is wrong and you ask them what the rumination rates are, "Oh, we haven't looked at it for 6 weeks.
(31:10) " Well, you know, Okay, so with those rumination monitors, what are the levels that you that you want to see on those for for when the diet and the cow are working together well? And I'm probably That's why I was asking the question, Mary Beth, because I'm probably not not the expert, but um they will talk about not going I can think of one herd that doesn't go below you always see problems if they're below 500 and ideally we're looking at um somewhere in the region of 530, 540.
(31:46) That would be cuds per hour. And you know, those sort of numbers. But, you know, it it slightly amazes me there isn't more study on it. We rely on the manufacturers of the the equipment to come up with these target numbers and they're not well monitored. And so, that goes to the industry supporting the research that would address this.
(32:11) I mean, it again, fine, I mean, easy for me to say, right? Um you know, I I I do know of various research facilities that have these type of collars, okay? And there has been work that I've seen done on the the monitors that also look at standing versus laying and and and this sort of thing.
(32:36) And quite honestly, I think the more information we can get on behavior and cow comfort and so forth will all play into this. It again, it's My talk was about manure, but but in truth, you you need to look at everything in context. I mean, are we having slug feeding? That that can end up showing up in the manure and it doesn't bode well, okay? And that can happen with with greater than 100 per Well, it depends how much feed bunk space you've got for the number of cows that are in there and how long that extends.
(33:10) Um Manure is a starting diagnostic, but you need to do right by the animals and the farm. You need to pull a lot more information together. Absolutely. Thank you for some great great answers there. Hey Shawn, while you're on, why don't you briefly introduce yourself and I I believe your accent, you're perhaps not Italian.
(33:38) But what I can say, manure. That's that's only for Italians, sorry. Shawn Richards um ruminant technical services manager for for Balchem for Europe, Middle East and Africa. So, I'm I'm very firmly a Brit. I'm Welsh by by birth. So, I'm here. I'm here representing the Europeans, not the Italians. And I say manure.
(34:16) Thank you for that, Shawn. We are getting questions from the audience. However, um you've not designated whether or not you'd like to come on live or not. Um And so, if you'll do that, I don't want to surprise anybody, but perhaps I will. I've got a question from uh Nicole. And uh we're going to bring you on unless we hear otherwise, Nicole.
(34:40) So, we'll we'll wait for you. >> of a comment than a question. Okay. And a comment relative to NIR, so it will be interesting. Yeah. Yes. Maybe we can have a conversation around that while we're waiting for Nicole. Uh I was going to ask a question that we had gotten from uh the webinar. And it was from Aaron Park uh from Selko.
(35:02) And he um would He wants to know would cows be affected with the uh uh avian influenza virus uh have a distinct manure presentation versus acidotic conditions? I can't speak I do not know. Okay. I mean, there one with um when you get into diarrhea and mucin casts and so forth, you do need to discern whether that's a disease state or whether it's diet-related.
(35:33) I mean, distinct differences, but I cannot tell you what specifically you would look for. Yeah. All right. Understood. Nicole, welcome. Thank you for joining us. >> Hi, Nicole. Yeah. Go ahead and and uh tell us about your comment. Oh, sure. Um so, I guess this is a maybe a few comments ago now, a few topics ago, but the on-farm NIR and manure, I was wondering if anyone had um any experience with how that performs on starch because NIR is sensitive, first of all, to moisture.
(36:12) So, if they're being scanned if the manure is being scanned without being dried and ground, that makes it very difficult to determine starch content, right? Because um the moisture peak tends to um what like overcome the other peaks, mask the other peaks. Um so when manure is usually like what, like 85% moisture, that makes it difficult.
(36:35) Um but with just that, um to to get the starch content accurately. And then the other um side of that is it's also sensitive to particle size. So like um Mary Beth was saying, um you know, you could have these large chunks of corn and manure. Um and then maybe nothing. So it's also very inconsistent. So just a a comment and I wondered if anybody had experience with with those on how they perform.
(37:06) And Nicole, but first before we answer some of those questions, tell us a little bit about yourself. Where are you from? What do you do? Sure. So I am the product development manager for Dairyland Labs. Um I've been here for like 11 years. Um I also live in Wiscon- Well, I live in Minnesota, but I'm on the border of Wisconsin.
(37:26) Okay, very well. Thank you for your questions. Mary Beth. >> What What I can tell you is that I agree with you. I'm a little bit concerned about using that on on farm. Sorry, Mary Beth. I interrupt you. No, no, no. Please. Please go ahead. I mean, that I I I'm not an expert of NIR, but but uh from what you all commented, you're just confirming my idea, right? So that that measuring that straight on farm manure through an NIR portable NIR system is not giving consistent results.
(38:03) So I'm not really reliable. Still, the old way is better, Mary Beth. You know, one of one of the Okay, this is under the heading of for what it's worth. Uh and again, not having worked with NIR for evaluation of manure. I mean, NIR is going to read what's presented to the light to the lens. And so unless you find ways to keep changing that or to to to allow it to see what's there.
(38:36) I mean, it the reason we started screening manure wasn't because we didn't have other things to do. It it was to try and see what was going on with the solids there. Now, you you needed to get rid of a lot of the microbial mass, the the brown stuff that pork green or whatever shade of color was there so that you could see what the solids were.
(38:57) I mean, I can't swear that none of the starch will be in a really tiny form that wouldn't go through the screens. You can't say that. Um but but trying to prep the sample, trying to get the the NIR to be able to read it correctly would take some effort, I would think. But but drying and grinding, you you take away a lot of that and including the large signal for for moisture if that becomes a problem.
(39:28) That makes sense. >> But I've not worked with it. Fair enough. All right. Nicole, any other questions or thoughts you'd like to share with the audience? Um oh, no. Thanks for Thanks for bringing me on and I definitely >> You're very welcome. Thanks you for joining us. We appreciate it. Thanks, Nicole. Take care, Nicole.
(39:46) All right. So Mary Mary Beth, I I have one of the a I have a question from the webinar that you gave. This is one of those back of the restaurant questions. From Jorge, is there an opportunity to evaluate ration quality through analysis of volatile compounds or the smell of the manure? It's Yeah. I had that one flagged as well, Clay.
(40:14) Okay, so so they're talk So are we talking about volatile compounds in the diet or in the manure? I think it's in the manure. Right. Okay. >> I read it. Never been down that path. Um I mean, the the one thing Mhm. There are all sorts of volatile compounds in manure. Um and actually uh Dr.
(40:43) Wendy Powers had been looking at volatile compounds in manure. A- actually, excuse me, in lagoon um when she was a grad student back at Florida. I remember she'd uh she'd have she'd take over this one classroom and have a variety of different samples that you had to sniff and and rank. And she would give you zucchini bread if you did this. This is how she baited people in.
(41:06) But but there were a lot of different compounds probably microbial in nature, not necessarily from the original diet, that showed up, but in in the kind of diet in the kind of manure evaluation that that I'd been describing that that hadn't been part of it. Now, if you walk into a barn, um you can end up smelling ammonia if things are really rank and you're getting a lot of of nitrogen excretion in a form that can be turned into ammonia.
(41:36) Um I have walked into barns where the manure has just been liquid and it almost had a sweet smell to it, but I wasn't sure if that was ketotic cows or the manure. Um when you walk into a I I can't speak directly to that question, but when you walk into a barn, use all of your senses except taste in trying to evaluate what's going on.
(42:08) Yeah, I advise against taste. Okay, I've got another question that came in during the webinar. This from Alexis. So, within a pen of cows, does the size of individual manure piles tell you anything? It's okay. Actually, in kind of kind of coming in from the side on that, maybe yes. If you walk into a pen that's all getting the same diet or the same TMR, same ration, theoretically, the manure should all look similar, except for maybe 5% of the cows.
(42:53) And that it kind of comes under the heading 5% of the cows will have manure that doesn't look like the others. That's normal, okay? But, if you go walk into a pen that has a lot of variation, you have some decent some decent some good-looking cow pies, you got diarrhea, you've got I mean, if you get a lot of variability, that can suggest one or two things to you.
(43:18) One way, shape, or form, first and foremost, they're not all getting the same diet, which would suggest they're sorting or slug feeding. The other one that we ran into, um um it was a research study that I I was running, and the herd manager came to me and said, "Dr. Hall, did you intend to lower the milk production in the cows on your study?" It's like, "No.
(43:44) " And so, I go out and I'm walking I'm walking my group of cows and trying to understand what's going on, and yes, the manure was variable in the pen. Some of it perfectly good-looking, and some of it just liquid. And then I walked around to the front of the bunk, and there were these clumps in there. And when I took a look at it, it was spoiled clumps of spoiled silage.
(44:04) And spoiled silage does not necessarily mix in well. And so I'm thinking the cows that drew the short straw and decided to take a bite of that got whatever mycotoxins were in the system. When we got to the point that they cleared off more of that from the bunk silo, cuz they were getting to the back of a drive-over silo, when that was cleared off, I became a much better nutritionist.
(44:32) Okay? And so, you know, take a look at things in the diet that if you've got Okay, back to the original question. Should all the cow pies be about the same size? I don't know about the same size, but same consistency and would suggest they're all getting the same diet. Different consistencies, something is affecting individual animals differently.
(44:53) Go figure out what that is. Thank you. One Wait, one other thing that can matter. Um This is This is me finding out how I was accused of being a bad nutritionist, but I was asked to figure out what was going on. And um and what was going on was the herd just looked ill. And some animals seemed worse affected. And there was variable manure, but I looked at the cows at the feed bunk, they weren't sorting.
(45:25) And it it took a couple weeks to figure out. And then I walked I was walking the herd. And the water tanks looked incredibly clean. And then I noticed there was this bucket hanging in the water tanks. And I inquired. Well, they were putting chlorine pool cleaning tablets in there to keep the water tanks clean.
(45:48) And the cows that drew the short straw as they were coming out of parlor and drinking, like when you initially have a full water tank with a bucket with chlorine tablets in it, it might be more dilute. As you got down, it apparently it was equivalent it was helping to disinfect the room and so as well.
(46:11) And once we once we got rid of those very effective cleaning tools for the water tanks like the cows came up 5 lb of milk over the weekend. Wow. >> And and so and no, it didn't make me look any better as nutritionist. But but it helped resolve a problem in the herd that I would the cows and I would prefer not to see it replicated elsewhere.
(46:37) Stefano, I got a question for you. You've levitated in the worlds of dairy and in beef. Do you see any similarities or differences in the way that you evaluate manure? Yeah, thanks for the questions, Scott. Um So, I would say that in beef somehow is more crucial. Cuz you know, I've never seen a beef producing milk, right? For cows, it's it's easier, right? You you you do some modification on the diet, you apply some strategies, and you can check the tank.
(47:12) You can check milk production, protein production, fat production. In beef, it's all looking at the animal, right? And most of the time, at least here in Europe, a lot of farmers, the first thing they look at is is manure. Uh so, how how is consistent uh between the animals? And you know, it's easier for us because as compared to US system that where you have huge pens, typically here in Europe we have small boxes with like 10 to 15 animals, some sometimes on liters, sometimes on slatted floors, that makes things even
(47:48) easier to check. So, I'm I mean, I think it's it's a crucial point for beef. Uh I use that a lot uh in the past actually most of the manure sitting that I did in my previous life I would say was a was a beef. Um, and the only thing that you have to pay attention is that you have to be very fast especially if you're in a box with heifers.
(48:13) Uh, to jump out if some someone in the box looks you strange but but that's that's that's that's the only the only fun but I was I was much younger so it I was much faster as well so no problem. But yeah it's crucial definitely definitely. Yeah well that's important here if I'm just going to say real quick Yeah.
(48:37) that that that in Europe I mean it's not uncommon at least where I've been at to see both a dairy and and beef on one farm. Uh, especially in like Belgium. Yeah yeah especially in the north in Italy I mean there are countries like Spain and Italy there are more separate business. Um, but in in northern Europe you can find mixed mixed farms some some sometimes.
(49:04) There are some reality where you can find uh, farmers growing up their Holstein bulls. But most of the business here and Spain uh, it's it's based on animal imported from France Ireland. Uh, so French cattle or Irish crossbreed breed so something like that. Yeah. Sorry Mary Beth I kind of stepped on you there. No so forgive me.
(49:31) Um, I was going to just echo what Stefano said that safety does matter. Okay. So when you're going when you're going and walking a herd looking at at cow pies especially if you're taking samples for any for rinsing or any or looking for mucin casts and that sort of thing. Make sure you you you end up looking around.
(49:53) First you check it's less common now, but are there any bulls in this pen? And then making sure you keep your eyes open for animals that are in heat and find who that finds you attractive. Um I mean and and just be careful. Be be careful out there. Definitely. Yeah. I have an interesting question that was asked during the the webinar.
(50:20) And it's related to gas production, methane. And are there any dietary components that's affecting this? In terms of methane production from the manure itself? >> that's the way I read the question. Yes, Mary Beth. Okay, I'll I'll toss it back out to my colleagues as well. Part of what I understand is that the more undigested nutrients that go to the manure, the more methane production, especially if it goes into a lagoon that you might be able you might experience.
(50:55) Clay, Stefana, what are your thoughts? I think you're right. I'm I'm not super expert, but I think you're right. The concept works fine to me. And you're you're giving a substrate in an anaerobic environment that's going to sit there for a good long time. Yeah? Yeah, right. >> Yeah. So so the more Okay, this is again MBBG, Mary Beth's best guess.
(51:25) I mean the more the more feed that we can turn into milk and less into manure, it is is going to serve. Yeah, you got enteric methane produced in the rumen and in the hindgut. Um but let's see if we can get more of the feed turned into milk and and into muscle. So Mary Beth from from a practical standpoint, sampling manure, if you're going to sample manure in a pen of cows, how many samples should you take? Yeah.
(52:01) And how should you get the samples? How do you get these Okay. Um I mean, getting samples just typically requires something you can carry that that that doesn't leak. All right? I have used a red beer cup, okay, or several series of them. Um and it's trying to get a diversity of samples, not just looking for the good stuff or the bad stuff, but trying to get a profile.
(52:27) Um so, depending how depending on your intestinal fortitude, if you want to take samples for for sifting them, for rinsing them, um three to five from a pen, it it depends what you're up for. Um I mean, and for looking for evaluating the consistency, that's just walking the pen. And you'll be you can see them there period.
(52:52) Um again, I've used red beer cups. It's The most interesting time was red beer cups that went into the cup holders in a Mercedes SUV. Um we made sure there wasn't stuff on the outside of them, okay? Um I have used cups that have lids on them, and that makes them a bit easier to carry. It It just depends how you figure out how to get them from point A, where you're collecting them, to where you can do anything with rinsing them.
(53:25) You got any better thoughts? No, I would agree. Um So, my other question is sort of related to that. So, so when you're sifting manure, are you trying to quantify anything by looking at it? I mean, do do you want you want to have a similar volume, I assume, right? Which which goes back to the cups. Yes. >> Yeah.
(53:48) You know, you what what are you looking for? I mean, again, I have used it qualitatively to to get a sense of what's coming through the animal undigested, the particle size because the more large particles means that it wasn't well processed It didn't stay in the rumen and be well ruminated and processed well, okay? Cuz rumination is what's going to break it down.
(54:11) Um break down the particle size. Um I have not tried to be quantitative. I was more interested in what story did it have to tell, how the animals and their diets were getting along. Uh and so, you know, because I I never tried to put a numeric system to manure evaluation because for me myself, I didn't decide what number to put on diarrhea that has large particles in it versus I mean, you you got the particles, you got the consistency, and I went for descriptors to tell a story, okay? That you could relate back to the cow and her diet. Um I wasn't
(54:58) quite for myself. I I was not quite sure what to do with numbers. So So I have to tell my manure screening story. This is from the 1990s, actually. This goes way back. So, this was done at a research facility, Tyson. We had individual dry matter intakes on every cow. So, I I sampled manure from 10 cows out of the herd.
(55:29) And we were feeding a little bit of fuzzy whole cotton seed in the herd. It was balanced for about 2 lb per cow of fuzzy cotton seed. Nine of the 10 cows, when I would screen, it was a coffee cup of manure. I would find one or two whole cotton seeds in the manure. The 10th cow, and this is for real.
(55:58) She was eating 100 lb of dry matter a day. How many cotton seeds do you think I found in that cup of manure? If she If she was eating that much, I'd expect more. Just cuz things would pass through more rapidly. Tell me I'm wrong. No, you're correct. 30. Did Wait, did they have still have the lint on them? So, a few did. Okay. Um Go ahead.
(56:33) Beautiful story. Would Anything more about that? What do you think? Um it's it certainly shows the influence of rate of passage on digestibility, right? Yeah, I do. And she was not that efficient, right? She She was milking 150 lb at the time. But on 100 lb of dry matter intake, it was it was crazy. Well, I I I tell you what, back in Florida, what what we would look for, whether with cotton seed hulls or with cotton seed, I mean, the the rule of thumb was if you see cotton seed come through, black and all the and no lint on it,
(57:12) it's sort of it sort of gets to the point of being like whole shell corn, where it can slide out of the rumen more readily. But if you But if you start seeing cotton seed come through with the lint on it, go back and take a look-see at do you have enough effective fiber forage fiber in the diet to be able to hold things in place, so at least that lint can be fermented off before it leaves the rumen. Right.
(57:36) >> Does that sound right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Mary Beth, I've got a real quick question here related to maybe some of our European um producers, uh what kind of experience have you had um losing it here, but measuring um uh manure consistency on grazing herds? In spring, it's very loose. Yeah. Okay. Uh actually, once one early spring, I was in New Zealand.
(58:11) And to um on some of these rocket fuel pastures, that grass pastures that they have. And with gloves on my hands, I I went pawing through the manure, and it was downright slimy. And it had like the vascular bundles, the xylem and phloem was coming through. And I'm seeing this slimy stuff, and I'm like, this got to be microbial. But, something with that high of moisture content and that digestible coming through was probably coming through pretty quick.
(58:43) Okay? Um But, that was normal. You if if there was a pile of starch in the diet and I saw that, the cows wouldn't have looked as good as the ones I was seeing. All right? Um I'm thinking at least in spring, pasture is going to be different. I Before I Before I was going to say graduated from USDA, before I retired from USDA, one of the things I wanted to do was see about going out and looking at some of the beef cattle on pasture across season.
(59:15) And and see what happened, but I never had the opportunity to do that. So, I talk I tossed it out to my colleagues, "Have you looked at the animals on pasture and how you need to change your interpretation as the season goes by, both for protein content, fiber content, intake. What do you got? I'm putting you on the hook. Yeah.
(59:43) Clay. I Sorry, I was reading some other questions here. You did You did put me on the spot. Well, I I mean, when when you're looking at animals on pasture, I mean, the the concern about them being used isn't the same concern we'd have if they're on a particularly high-starch diet and you're worried about hindgut fermentation.
(1:00:14) It's pastures are what these animals were designed to use. And so, as they get looser, you're looking at protein or really digestible fiber, right? Yes. >> And really digestible non-fiber carbohydrates that are in there. And at some other point, I've got another talk, which is water-soluble carbohydrates.
(1:00:33) No, they are not fast starch. It's what these animals have been designed to use. Okay? So, I get less concerned about loose cows on pit So, loose loose manure in cows on pasture. Yeah. Yeah, I would agree. Yeah. I've got kind of a a question maybe we'll use kind of in transition to closing here, but you know, there's there's a lot of ways that and and it it hearkens back to one of the first questions or comments was a lot of ways to measure biology of the the animals, right? It's growth, milk production, body condition, lots and lots of things that are related
(1:01:09) to uh the productivity of the animal. And I sense that perhaps maybe another biological measure, you know, looking at manure and understanding the out that output maybe under appreciated and underutilized and so that's my takeaway. I want to ask you would you confirm that? Do you think that there's Does there need to be more science, more attention paid to this? And and utilized at the dairy level.
(1:01:40) Just kind of curious. I think people have to take a look at their cows and I have to take a look at everything that's around what's affecting their cows, okay? I mean from their comfort, from how much bunk space they have available, how much space they have to lie down, what the diet looks like, what the feeds look like.
(1:02:01) The manure gives you a talking point that that can integrate those together but it can't stand by itself. Yeah. But it gives you the cows direct response. I mean when I'm walking a herd, I'll also look at I mean do the cows look ill? I mean do looking dull versus bright-eyed and and ears up and the rest of it and also not running from me, okay? Um I think again, integrative approach.
(1:02:30) One of the challenges that can happen with manure evaluation is it becomes a treasure hunt. Okay, that sounds funny but it's true. I mean where where you're looking for something interesting but you got to make sure you keep it in context. Um I think the emphasis has to be on integrating the various tools we have, some of the technologies that can make it easier for us to look at rumination and the rest of it.
(1:03:00) They're lovely because it the question gets to be how much time do you have to do what you need to do on a dairy farm or what can the advisors to the dairy farm help you look at in context for what needs to happen in a herd. Um It we need things to bring the whole picture together. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, makes perfect sense.
(1:03:25) You know, in closing, what I'd like to do is ask each of you guys to kind of give us just a few comments on what the key takeaways are for from this conversation. And Dr. Vandoni, if you wouldn't mind, can we start with you? >> Balchem has invested decades perfecting the art of nutrient encapsulation. And now, new AminoSure XL is setting a new standard, delivering 35% more metabolizable lysine than leading competitors.
(1:04:00) With AminoSure XL, you can provide your cows with a more consistent and higher quality source of metabolizable lysine, leading to improved and more dependable results. A recent meta-analysis found that feeding rumen-protected lysine led to an increase in milk fat percentage and 4.4 more pounds of energy corrected milk.
(1:04:22) Feed new AminoSure XL to your cows and have confidence that you're using the most consistent, reliable, and cost-effective source of lysine on the market today. Learn more at balchem.com/excel. Thank you. Well, my my takeaway is that probably we need to open a subsidiary of Mary Beth company called "Manure is always right.
(1:04:56) " No, I'm I perfectly agree with with Mary Beth. I believe that sometimes with all these technologies that are that we're using now in formulation, managing cows, we're we're not really looking anymore has uh careful as it was done in the past to to to signals that the cow can give us. Uh and and again, manure is is for sure one of them, but not the only one.
(1:05:26) It has to be connected with all other signs that you can you can see on farm, detect on farm. Um and just as I said, not rely on on paper because we know that between paper and what is reality on farm, there is sometime many many differences. Yeah. Great comment, Stefano. Clay, what do you have to say? Well, I want to say obviously that a very interesting topic.
(1:05:56) So, your real science lecture was definitely a record for the number of questions that came in Yeah. for that one. So, I've I've never seen so many questions on a topic and and really varied questions. Yeah. So, there's a huge amount of interest in this area. Um it's really not talked about enough. Uh and certainly it's very important, you know, as a nutritionist to to keep an eye on the manure and and certainly, you know, look for changes in you know, in manure consistency um in the herd.
(1:06:31) Yeah. Yeah, thank you for that, Clay. Mary Beth, final comments. I I'd echo my colleagues' comments. Um at the end of the day, one of my husband, who who is a dairy cattle nutritionist, his comment to folks is it's not rocket science, it's manure. Okay? At at at the end of the day, it's everything in context.
(1:06:57) And I do I do think that people have to remember that the cow is always right. Okay? We we need to see how she is take a serious look at be good cow people and take a look at she's how she's relating with the things that affect her manure being one of them and just remember that the programs we have are not the final word there there's a lot we don't know even in diet formulation at this point so don't forget everything you know as a sound cow person nutritionist veterinarian look at the cows see how they integrate and just know
(1:07:38) they're the ones who are right so how do we make things work for her and that's individual to the farms don't forget all the things we've learned over time as we as we look at computer outputs great comments Mary Beth you're an awesome guest want to thank you want to thank you for the webinar we're going to have to make you a regular right so yeah cheers so so start working on your next presentation what else do you want the audience to know and and what gets you on the calendar because this is this has been great and there's a a lot yet that we
(1:08:15) have to learn Stefano Clay you guys are awesome guests appreciate you joining us to our audience out there thank you once again for coming along and and having some fun with it with us hope you learned something hope you had some fun and hope to see you next time here at Real Science Exchange where it's always happy hour and you're always among friends We'd love to hear your comments or ideas for topics and guests so please reach out via email at anh.marketing@balchem.
(1:08:43) com with any suggestions and we'll work hard to add them to the schedule Don't forget to leave a five-star rating on your way out you can request your Real Science Exchange t-shirt in just a few easy steps just like or subscribe to the Real Science Exchange and send us a screenshot along with your address and t-shirt size to anh.marketing@balchem.com.
(1:09:06) Balchem's Real Science lecture series of webinars takes place on the first Tuesday of every month with the top research and nutrition topics that will impact your business. We also include small ruminant, monogastric, and companion animal focused topics throughout the year. Visit balchem.com/realscience to see the upcoming topics and to register for future webinars.
(1:09:28) You can also access past webinars and search for the topics most important to you.