Redefining Amino Acid Impact: New Research Unveiled (UK) - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FY-pfX4BTVI

Transcript:
(00:05) Good evening everyone and welcome to the real science exchange the podcast where leading scientists and industry professionals meet over a few drinks to discuss the latest ideas and trends in dairy nutrition. Hi, I'm Scott Reel. I'm going to be your host here this afternoon. We're at the Real Science Symposium and that's about Kim uh part of our real science media.
(00:23) We have uh we have symposia, we have podcasts, we have webinars, and we recently introduced something called the real producer exchange where we interview uh dairy farmers uh from around the world. And it's an opportunity for other dairy farmers to listen in on best practices, what worked and even what didn't work. And so that's that's a section that we we we focus on quite a bit as well.
(00:42) So, but this is the uh real science symposia where we do the symposia around the world uh and in person. Um this real science symposia was titled redefining amino acid input new research unveiled. So we had several speakers today. The first of which is Dr. Mike Vanamberg and Mike gave us two presentations today.
(01:02) One was kind of technical in or uh orientation and it was titled amino acid nutrition for increased milk and milk components. And so the second one he gave was more applied and that one was titled uh feeding cows for one ton of components and 2,000 kg of milk per year. Right. So that was meant to be a little aspirational. 20,000.
(01:26) What did I say? >> 2,000. >> 2,000. It's 20,000. There we go. All right. U Mike, I'm going to circle back to you. But to uh your right is uh Dr. um Usman Arshad and he's from the Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich. The title of his presentation was lysine, a vital amino acid for maximizing milk production.
(01:46) And then finally uh to my left here is Dr. Shawn Richards. Sean's with Balim and he gave a presentation titled driving milk component yield with Aminaure. And so uh then not to be left out, Dr. Stephano Vani. He's going to be the co-host this afternoon. Going to keep us uh in line here and ask some good questions for us.
(02:05) So with that, what I'd like to do, Mike, is is start off with you. um just kind of give us a brief overview of yourself. >> Well um I've been on the faculty at Cornell for 30 years this year. Um I um have um I advise I still you know as a faculty member I'm kind of a full service guy.
(02:26) I um I still advise about 35 undergraduate advises. I advise the dairy club. I lead the dairy fellows program which is our experiential learning uh program and I I lead the CNCPS effort. So that's that's kind of who I am. Every once in a while I go home and I see my wife and kids. >> Dr. Vanderberg. There he is. All right. Usman, this is not your first time to the pub.
(02:48) Um I believe the very first time I met you were actually a student at uh University of Florida. So tell us a little bit about yourself. >> Uh yeah, it's been six years working with Balcom. I would say uh I am basically a veterinarian by training and then I moved to states from Pakistan in 2018 to did my PhD at University of Florida with Jose Santos working mainly on the choline and how choline can improve the performance in dairy cows and then I graduated in 2023 moved to UW medicine working with Heather White did some trial there on lysine and amino
(03:22) acids and feed efficiency and recently I moved to ETHuric working as a research science scientist and study director of the program. So I have five master students at the moment and two PhD students where I'm co-supervising with the mutiny new. So yeah, >> excellent. Well, thank you for joining us. To my left here, Dr. Sean Richards.
(03:42) Sean, you've been with Balkam not all that long. Tell us a bit about yourself and kind of your background. >> Thanks, Scott. Yeah, I've been with BCM almost a year now. Um, remnant technical services manager for Europe, Middle East, and Africa. Um before that worked for a number of um companies in the feed industry, come from a farming background in North Wales and um very passionate about dairy cows.
(04:05) >> All right, good. And Stephano, you're going to be the co-host today and color commentator. So you're a bit of a retread, right? You started out with Balkam, you left, now you're back again. How long you've been gone? Tell us about yourself. >> So well, yes, this is my second experience in Balkcam.
(04:22) Uh I've been in with Balkam 6 years, then I left and now it's I'm back since April. Uh as a background uh I'm a beef guy actually. So I have a PhD in beef cattle nutrition and management. As I always say, I turn to the black side of the ruminant for work for my job. So uh but yeah, I'm passionated about ruminant, I would say.
(04:43) So I still work on some some time on on beef, but majority of my time is on dairy. >> Well, welcome back. We're glad to have you. >> Thank you. >> Mike, going to turn to you. Give us a brief overview of that very first presentation you gave. It was technical oriented. Uh but let's start with that one. >> Sure, Scott.
(05:03) Um I think a a short version of that would be that we we spent a lot of time trying to figure out as we were building version 7, how to integrate energy and and protein uh to represent, you know, the requirements of a lactating dairy cow. uh we stumbled on um an approach where we could integrate uh amino acids directly with energy and and then we started uh testing it and what we found is that when we gave them more amino acids they actually responded and sometimes they responded in ways that we we didn't fully appreciate like you know why did amino acids increase
(05:40) fat fat synthesis uh but that led to some you know relearning you know how the memorary gland and does partition nutrients and that that helps us figure out how to improve milk milk composition and also energetic efficiency. >> Yeah. Mike, one of the the slides that you've given several times that I'm I'm kind of enamored with is the the one that shows the genetic improvement over time and like the last five years, actually it's probably 10, but it's it's been uh changing exponentially.
(06:08) So, my question is, you're talking a little bit about requirements and and trying to meet the cow's requirements. Do we really know what they are uh today? and then where are they going to be in five years from now and how do we keep up with that? >> Um that's the question that's motivating my research team right now.
(06:24) You know, we've got some nuts and bolts things that we're working on, you know, but but some of the visioning stuff is is how do we set up studies to actually test that, Scott? That, you know, I can This sounds a little bit silly, but I would say I don't know if we really know their requirements, >> right? >> I really don't think we do.
(06:44) >> Um, and there's some what I didn't talk about, right? Just to that question, one of those herds that I highlighted, you know, that 4,000 cow herd in the north, it's got that that that barn or that pen full of those high genomic cows, those holings. When I called him a few weeks ago, I was talking about wanting to do this genotype by nutrition interaction study with them.
(07:06) And he after a little while, he goes, "Oh, that's what you want to do? We're already kind of doing that." And I said, "What do you mean?" He says, "Well, uh, my nutritionist and my my genetics counselor were here and they said, 'You know, if you've got that kind of capacity, why why don't we play around a little bit?" I said, "Well, what did you do?" He says, "We quadrupled the amount of those amino acids we were you tell us we're supposed to feed.
(07:30) " >> Yeah. >> And I said, "Really? I'm driving down the road at, you know, 75 miles an hour and I'm thinking, huh, I don't know if I should pull over or if I should just keep driving because my brain went someplace else, right? I wasn't focused on the road." And I said, 'Okay, so tell me what happened.
(07:45) ' He goes, "They improved their productivity and that's how they got to 7% fat in some of those cows." And I said, "Okay." Interesting. It's fascinating, right? It >> it is. And I got so many questions kind of around this kind of whole area. I don't want to pick on you, Sean, but during your presentation, you um you said you you were showing us what percent of the methionine and lysine were being met.
(08:10) And and and the thought occurred to me is by what measure? by what requirements and are we even farther underwater than we think we are today? And then just to build on that, right? I mean, Mike then did a >> I like your word usage, underwater, right? I don't think we're underwater. We're just not optimizing. How's that? >> All right, fair enough.
(08:29) >> The other the other um uh idea you had is comparing the Fiat to the Ferrari. And then I I was asking myself, do we have a barn full of Ferraris and just treating them like Fiats? >> I think so. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. No, I don't think it's that bad. >> Okay. >> But I think that's that's a good analogy of what the potential is if we could figure out how to tell them to do it.
(08:51) >> Yeah. All right. All right. Scott's going to quit talking now. Uh Stephano, got some questions from the audience. >> Yeah. I mean, there there are multiple question about the UK being a liquid milk. um market mainly. So one of the question was would you change the approach to amino acid balancing in a liquid milk not uh pricing protein and fat? Um and the other question was um what are the other benefit that you can get out of amino acid except what you present today that was milk production, protein, fat content and so
(09:34) on. >> Is that for me? >> Yep. >> Okay. Um so that's a common question. You know what if my milk market doesn't pay for components and I just want to get more volume. So, so what I didn't show today um is a study where we asked some of those same questions, but we started in the close-up period and we we fed a control diet in the close-up period.
(10:05) Um typical close-up dry cow system with whatever, you know, 1100 gram probably around, 1100 gram of metabizable protein. And then we we had a treatment where we moved that up to 1,600 grams of metabolizable protein. And then that was in the close-up. And then in the fresh period, we did the same thing where we had a typical fresh diet.
(10:28) And then we we enhanced um the MP supply in the treatment. I can pull up that data sometime and show people. Um, I'm not going to remember the grams per MCAL right now, but there was a significant difference like four to 4 to 600 grams difference in MP supply altogether from the control to the high high was about 7 kilos of energy corrected milk.
(10:56) All right. And it wasn't mostly it wasn't components, it was lactose, right? So I think to your question, in a in a fluid milk market where you're not being paid on components, you got to start at the initiation of lactation, right? So start it prior to cving. Um, get your MP up. the moment they cave in in that fresh pen, you've got to push your MP up and then you've got to reinforce that because if you're going to get, you know, five or six or seven kilos of milk up to peak.
(11:30) Um, you've got to reinforce that all the way through, right? And, uh, but that's a lot of milk and that's a lot of milk volume. So, that's I think for I think that's one that's that's how I would tell people in a fluid milk market how you're going to make that work. the the other things that we know of and this is such a hard thing because nobody's the problem with with asking about what about all the things like immune system infla inflammation you know repro all those things there's only a couple repro studies where um there's actually been
(12:03) longitudinal data right and Sean talked about that um when it gets to the immune system we know there's a huge demand for amino acids in in immune system responses so I I think we probably enhanced the immune system response but we again nobody's done the challenge studies directly to to figure that out yet right that's there if there's a hole in our research um there's one where we do challenge studies at at good amino acid balancing and not >> okay >> great answer Mike you know if I can just come in and you know add to that I think
(12:40) you know very much here in Europe here in the UK you see that lysine and methane are both closely limiting and I think you know one of the challenges is if people are looking for components you you can add methionine and see a milk protein response but if you want to drive yield then you've got to true amino acid balance and I think that's where the opportunity comes I think lysine you know we don't have blood meal in Europe so I think our lysine levels are consistently lower than than US type diets. And that is where the opportunity
(13:20) comes to be able to lift milk yield by by using true amino acid balancing and and bring that forward. And I think I'll add to the second question about health and fertility. I think you know I had a slide in my presentation that talked about a practical UK farm that saw through amino acid balancing I think 600 kilos more milk per cow per year but actually felt the the cost of the amino acid was paid for by improvements in health and fertility.
(13:58) And I remember going through the data with a consultant and you know there were less cows with um mastitis, there was less uh matritises. The the all the numbers moved in the in the right direction and you know what was that a control trial? No, it wasn't. But to me there there's really strong evidence that if you meet the amino acid requirement, you you help support the immune system and inflammation management that helps health and fertility.
(14:32) >> Yeah, if Stephano allows me, I would like to add on what Sean just mentioned. Uh we recently conducted an experiment at UW medicine uh where we had uh a group of cows 64 32 cows where we had MP adequate diet and then a group of cows 32 again where we had MP deficient diet and the cows on the MP deficient they were getting almost 250 grams less metabizable protein whatsoever was required uh based on their production performance.
(15:04) And then what we did is we supplemented those two diets for 12 weeks starting from the mid-lectation all the way to the end of mid-lectation. And then we collected the blood samples at the end of the 12th week. And then we isolated the Tlymphosytes. And the Tlymphosytes are very much necessary for the adaptive immune response.
(15:21) And once we isolated the Tlymphosytes, then we run the seahorse analysis. We really wanted to see how the amino acid supply can alter the molecular and cellular pathways. Not only just oh we saw less mastitis. We really wanted to see what's going on at the molecular level. So interestingly what we observed is so the flexibility to respond to a metabolic challenge of lymphocytes was reduced in MP deficient cows in simpler words.
(15:51) So when we challenge those lymphocytes in the lab with or without some metabolic active agents I don't want to go to detail. So the flexibility to respond towards that challenge of those lymphocytes was lot more improved when they were having adequate amount of amino acids in the diet. So which which tells uh me that immune system they certainly need amino acids and the function of the immune cells specifically tly lymphocytes is enhanced when they adequate when the diet is adequate in amino acids. This work was
(16:22) presented at ADSA and the manuscript is in under review JDS. So hopefully it will be interesting to read. Yeah, just wanted to add on that whatever you do at the farm level, it really goes into the cellular level and body cows really respond to that. >> Yeah, thank you man. Uh while you got the microphone, why don't you go ahead and share with us kind of a brief overview of the presentation you gave earlier today. Yeah.
(16:47) So the presentation which I did today was based on the meta analysis where we wanted to address a question because there is some uncertaintity that should I supplement protected lysine should I not supplement protected lysine. So what we did is we collected all of the literature whatsoever is available at the moment and then we conducted a meta analysis and what we observed is among 12 experiments 13 experiments with little bit over 600 cows data.
(17:15) So we we showed that cows which were supplemented with rumin protected lysine specifically the ones if you start in early lactation and the ones where you supplemented for a little bit longer duration uh they produce one and a half kilos more milk uh than those cows which did not which were not fed by the room. So which really tells me that supplementation of amino acids improves the productive performance in cows.
(17:40) >> Uh Tanya I'd like to go to the audience see if there's any questions out there. here. If you guys have questions, just raise your hand and Tanya will get you a microphone. Anybody have a question for us that we got one over here? >> Yeah, thanks guys. Um Stephanie, you said I had to ask this out loud, not on the app.
(17:58) So, uh um I suppose mainly directed at Mike, but everyone else feel free to jump in. um given that there appears to be some some flexibility of utilization within those group two amino acids which obviously includes lysine um a how do we account for this when rationing and b do we need to build it into ration formulation software and I guess how do we do that if so >> that's a great question I'll try to answer that as completely as I can to the point I don't know was this setup between you two or something no okay >> um but if I back up a step, right? I I I
(18:33) um I talked about Lobly, right? And in the I think the key to the whole thing is that we're probably not going to be able to describe the use of all those group twos, right? But we know that they're going to go to non-essentials and they're going to be oxidized. And I showed you guys that the lysine and the histadine and some of them are going to go, you know, into pathways to support enzyme activity and as carrier proteins for fat synthesis, right? So those are non net uses right which is why you see that uptake greater than than the
(19:06) export. I think I think the way we calculated or estimated the requirements by tying it to energy and then finding an optimum in a lactating cow was probably the best way we know how to do that because because in that condition the primary energy and nutrient utilization is is to support lactation.
(19:32) But at the same time all those other uses have to be accounted for. Right? Which is why I made the point about you know we m I think we make a gross oversimplification and mistake when we say hey I'm I'm just and and the naim did this right you guys don't know the na but they did this where they drove all the requirements through milk protein and that ignores all of those other uses right you can come up with an efficiency to do that but it's really confounded by by all the other things going around in the cow so I think that's that global efficiency
(20:03) that we came up with as an optimum not a maximum imum right because the maximum would be more efficient is the way we can account for some of that that interaction you know to that point you mentioned lysene uh I can still hear Hela laier in my head we would have these you know this is quite a few years ago now we would go to the meetings whatever meeting right whether we're in Europe or we're in the US and she'd say to me Mike why does the mamary gland take up all the lysine it sees right if it's such an essential amino acid and
(20:33) not put it in the in the milk protein and it would look at her and say because it's got must be other metabolic uses, right? But but all biochemical pathways will show that, right? And I didn't show that today, but you know, lysine goes all sorts of places. You know, oxalloacetate, you know, we can go all sorts of different places there.
(20:54) So, I I think I think that the way we did that probably captures it for right now. May we might figure out a a better moss trap eventually, but you know if how what gives again you got to look you got to look around and say did anybody else do this? Well, poultry and swine operate that way and it's worked for them for many years.
(21:18) So I'm I'm hoping that that as long as you can as long as you can resolve the amino acids coming out of the rin then we should be we should be good. If I can just add to that, you know, I I think great answer, Mike. If you look at a typical Northern European diet, our lysine adequacy is somewhere around 80 80 85%. Now, you know, are we balancing to get to 100%? Yes or no.
(21:51) But we are getting, if you improve that number, you'll see a response. So, are you going to 100? Are you going to 97? But you will see a response and that's how you build it into practical ration situations is you you you build it in as as a trend in the right direction. And you know we may you know when Mike reoptimizes his amino acid requirements and we come up with the next generation.
(22:17) You know the numbers may change but we're making a step in the right direction. And I think one of the key messages I've got out of today, and I think Mike's used it a number of times, is is improving the energy efficiency of a cow by amino acid balancing. And that is absolutely key to how we balance and ration cows. >> Yeah.
(22:38) And I can add I did the same exercise that Sean show today in his presentation for Italian diet and Middle East diet. It's exactly the same. wherever you don't use a source of lizin like blood mill you have a lack of lizin you have a lack of metion as well so I would say it's a very common problem uh for all the derations so uh it's something that we need to improve and complete balancing of amino acid is where we have to go the direction that we have to follow while we're on the lactose subject the in my innocent way of looking at it.
(23:16) Lactose is the osmotic driver to drag milk volume and lactose directly reflects blood glucose. We use it as a default measure. But what you're saying is that that simple serial transition of glucose to lactose through the other is actually much more complicated than we're led to believe. So, I'm not sure if you can explain federal milk orders to us in the time we've available, but we have an even more complicated pricing structure for milk over here with every dairy having um variations between white water and
(23:50) paying for solids. So more often than not we have a challenge of people who are producing unnecessarily high solids and would actually get more income by having more volume at a marginally lower solids than we have people who are struggling for solids percent actually. So with your explanation now of the relationship between lysine and lactose is you may be revealing a a different approach for us on those situations where we can get more income by having more volume less solids.
(24:26) So this is a very complicated I'm going to give a very complicated answer because it does come down to milk composition. So one of the things that we're noticing is as we as we change nutrient supplies and signaling that we can redirect the carbon within the cell and it's a fascinating thing right because it's driving Barbano crazy because I keep asking him questions at the root of he goes we got to look at the ribboucle activity okay well but we're not going to do that routinely right so how can we do it we can do freezing point depression on milk
(25:01) because he's because here's where that goes. So as we as we get and this all comes back to trying to figure out how to turn turn the protein synthesis on. So one of the things that we've noticed is when we we do this the the milk fat will increase the milk protein sometimes increases.
(25:24) When that happens the lactose as a proportion decreases. Now, if you put it on a fat-free basis, it comes back close to normal, but not fully. So, my my question to Dave a few weeks ago, we both work too hard. It's a Saturday or a Sunday, and I'm sending him emails, and he's responding, and he's a little upset with me because I'm challenging what I think we know about milk composition.
(25:48) But here's where I'm going. Um because the one of the things that a heer does and this is fairly well known. A heer never makes as much lactose. A first lactation animal never makes as much lactose as an adult cow because they still have a growth requirement. Right? So they're putting that extra energy into the growth requirement, but they compensate by the whey component minerals and that creates a fairly high osmotic pressure that offsets the lactose.
(26:24) So the really interesting thing is as we get these cows that can make all this fat, they have the same capacity to make the protein because my my question to your point my question to Barbano has been if we can turn this protein on and the relationship between casein and whey always remains the same.
(26:47) As we drive the casein synthesis up, we're going to bring that way along. we're going to get those minerals and there's less requirement for that lactose which means we can get more volume by turning on the protein and we know in body tissue the water always follows the protein right so what I'm wondering is if we can turn that protein on all of a sudden the milk volume is going to go up with it and it's going to moderate the fat a little bit right and that's why I'm so that's why this whole thing about why the gland decides it's okay to make
(27:18) fat first and not the protein is really intriguing to me. I still think it's because we're short on leucine and isolucine, right? There's just not enough resources to actually make it in most of these these cows today. We've hit the next limitation, which is why you don't see it in the federal order data, right? It's not jumping at the same rate.
(27:37) So, I you ask a really good question. I just gave you guys a really complicated answer. Um, but I think we if we can figure out how to turn the protein on, then we're going to get that milk volume and it's going to make everybody that that question that was asked back there, that'll make that a lot easier to, you know, how do we get into fluid market? How do we get paid work? My question, my comment would be do you think that is different for Mike you know in terms of US to Europe because of I would say background whether with blood meal the US is nearer to amino
(28:13) acid requirement than Europe is and do you think that that changes that response in terms of lactose or do you think it's the same? Oh. Oh, the milk response is going to be the same. I think the the if no matter what you do there, if we can turn on the protein. >> Yep. >> We're we're going to get I think the volume I think the volume's going to increase.
(28:34) >> Yeah. >> Right. I I think the question is is how do we tell the mammary gland it's okay to make protein or how to get it to make the protein? I think it wants to, right? I don't think there's anything holding it back except for the fact it might not have all the nutrients that it needs. It's kind of like that conveyor belt thing, right? They're just not all there to to allow it to do that.
(29:00) How much without looking at memorary gland in in isolation, how much is the interaction with general metabolism and thinking things like you know insulin etc. having an impact on what and perhaps mTor in terms of what how the cow is prioritizing what he's going to do you know where does that all fit together or do you think it is all at the level of the memorary gland >> no there's definitely signaling involved um if you go back to the to the '9s and I was tangently involved in that because I helped make the diets when Dale Bowman
(29:37) was trying to figure out milk composition and milk fat you know, he he stumbled on some things by accident, kind of like we did, right? Dale Dale was was challenging the idea that insulin if you got an increase in insulin that would that would cause a drop in nephas, the drop in nephas because it, you know, it's going to be held in the atyposite.
(29:59) So now you're going to get less milk fat, right? You get milk fat depression by that. And that's that was an old idea. And what he found out when he so he would do these things called uglycemic insulinic clamps, right? Where he'd infuse one heck of a lot of glucose in the juggler vein of a cow and then push the insulin up to keep the glucose, you know, right around 100 or whatever number he was targeting in the cow.
(30:24) And what we found is that the cows made a lot more milk protein without changing the diet. So the moment the gland saw the insulin signaling, the first thing the gland did was make more protein. And it was significant. It's like 18 to 25% more protein. Right? Now, that's short term because we didn't change the diet. Eventually, they were going to run out, right? But it was very clear that insulin was signaling the gland to make more protein.
(30:47) So, that's very important in this whole process. Now, there's arguments about that now in the current system because I made a comment about that the other day at the Minnesota Nutrition Conference and two of my colleagues, you know, countered that and said, "No, I don't think insulin's important at all. actually it actually shuts down protein synthesis.
(31:04) And I'm like, I don't think so, but I'm not going to argue with you in front of everybody, right? But but that flies in the face of the clamp data, right? So I I think, you know, here's here's here's one way to think about this, and I said this to a group yesterday. So, back to the milk volume question. Um, we ran a study where we we balanced all the amino acids and the sponsor wanted us to feed chromium, right? And and I I like chromium through the transition.
(31:38) I wasn't really that much in favor of feeding chromium and established lactation. So, we we balanced the uh amino acids just like I showed you guys earlier. We had the we had the lysine very very high about 250 grams. We had the methane, the histadine, everything we're supposed to do. The cows are performing with the chromium.
(32:01) They never budged on milk components. But again, I get the phone call from from Barbano, right? These are always, you know, sounds like a theme there, right? Um, and it sound almost, you know, it's almost like a comedy routine when you're there. Um, and he said, "What are you doing this time?" And I said, "Why are you asking me that?" He goes, "You guys have the highest lactose I've ever measured in Holmes.
(32:22) " And I'm like, "Huh, that's interesting." Because my poor grad student was lamenting the fact that we didn't see the milk component shift, right? But we had we never went below we never dropped below 52 kilos of milk on average in that experiment. I mean, those cows those cows made milk. We had we had cows hitting 70 and 80 kilos of milk in that study, right? Very high lactose.
(32:54) Now, they still made a lot of fat and protein because it it didn't go away, but that to to the question about the insulin. So, if the chromium is going to cause a clearance of the circulating insulin quicker, then there's less message going to the gland to upregulate protein synthesis. So, it looks like the carbon defaults to the lactose and we get more volume.
(33:17) That's our that's our interpretation of what we saw there, right? So that insulin signaling I think is very important and and that back to the volume, you know, if you're in a milk fluid milk market, that may be one strategy. You know, we want to go back and test that one more time, but I went back and read all the literature, right? And and there's a significant decrease in circulating insulin in every cow that was ever fed beef or otherwise it was fed chromium.
(33:43) So that would mean you're going to have less signaling at the mammary gland. So you could change components and >> that fascinates me Mike you know as as you know you know early in my career I worked on the impact of insulin on fatty acid synthetase and desaturates and insulin increases milk fat synthesis and desaturation and what do you see when you feed lysine you see that increase in fatty acid synthesis and probably desaturate activity and therefore you're having in my you somewhere an insulin or an insulin signaling effect. And if you
(34:19) can if you can block that with cream, you may drive more milk. It it's be very interesting. >> That's that's our next study, right? We're we're going to do we're going to do a study where we're we're going to do the amino we're going to do amino amino acids and fatty acids at the boundaries of what we know with and without insulin and with and without chromium.
(34:39) >> That would be a fat. >> So, but we're going to do biopsies at the mammary gland and the liver. Right. So we're going to we're going to work on those mechanisms cuz it's SCD insulin sensitivity is not described in the memorary gland. >> So if it's conserved like I think it should be then it should parallel what you should what you found.
(34:56) >> Yep. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. That would be fascinating. We'll wait to see those results. >> So Mike, you gave a second presentation that was more practical oriented. Uh can you kind of give us an overview of that? What were some of the key takeaways there? >> I think I forgot it already. No, I'm just kidding. You guys have made me that whole milk composition thing gets my brain in another spot.
(35:19) Um, what did it >> podcast? >> Oh yeah, the 20,000 kilo cow. I I think I think the point of that, Scott, is is we have, you know, if you think of cows as athletes, we have a lot of athletes in our barns. We have tremendous potential. I think we have to think differently. You know, there's there's always the very practical things about cow comfort, cleanliness, water availability, saling time, all of that.
(35:45) But that, you know, as the cow increases her capacity to make milk, that stuff becomes much more important and more relevant. But I also think because we're building these animals that have such capacity that, you know, very early in life, we have to treat them like those animals and reinforce that capacity, right? So the moment they hit the ground, you got to you got to treat them like that animal that's that's going to break a world record, that's hard.
(36:10) That's a lot of management intensity. Uh but when we do that, you know, and and when we manage well, we see these cows responding in in really good ways, right? And to the earlier point about repro and other things, you know, in those herds where we're we're doing a good job meeting all those things, those cows get pregnant, you know, they have normal dry periods, everything looks pretty good, and they last three or four lactations.
(36:33) high volumes of milk. So, it's you just got to give them the need. You got to meet their needs, right? But you got to work a little harder to do it. >> Yeah. So, kind of related to that, maybe a little oddball question, but you know, you've often heard that you can't push don't push your cows too hard.
(36:49) You're going to wear them out. >> Uh, right. And so, I've heard Dr. Sanderson. I don't if you remember Ken, but but he he was of the mind that no, um these high producing cows, if you give them the nutrition that they need, they're simply going to express their biology. Uh and it it's actually a symptom of health and and not um wearing them out.
(37:11) I I don't if you want to talk to that. >> I talk about this all the time. More when I come to Europe actually. Okay. Um, yeah, Scott, it it is a pull system, right? The mammary gland is a pull system that's managed by communication between the memorary gland, the liver, and the brain, right? And the mammary gland wants to run as fast as it possibly can.
(37:37) That's the way it's designed. But if there's something in the environment that is is not, you know, if they can't eat enough, if they can't lay down, if it if if some of those things become limitations, then then the brain and the livers are sending signals back to the memorary gland telling it to slow down, right? Um, but if if there's no limitations then and the cow can eat what she wants and lay down when she wants and has everything going for her, then then there's not there's not going to be that negative communication. So, yeah, she's
(38:11) it's a pull. She's just going to go and that is the best expression of the lack of stress that we have. >> Yeah, absolutely. >> Um, Sean, y >> I think there's a question from the audience. Sorry. The the reference to athletes is interesting because human athletes tend to be reproductively compromised. Um it's essential in a a productive dairy herd that reproductive ability is maintained.
(38:40) And you've all referenced apparent fertility effects on. So high producing cows which have successful lifetime careers are reproductively successful. So how what have you got on reproductive ability with these very high yields? So we are paying attention to that. Is there a direct effect of amino acids? Probably.
(39:03) Um there's not enough longitudinal data to actually look at that. Energy balance is important, right? Just like just like um people who uh lose a bunch of body weight and um don't cycle appropriately, that's that's going to have a problem. Um, so I I think it's just energy balance and and things of that nature, but getting getting semen in them when they're in heat is really important because I I think that's the interesting thing is that even even when we see cows that are putting out high volumes of milk, as long as we can get them to cycle and we
(39:37) can put the semen in them at the right time, they still get pregnant, right? So it's not like they're anestrous. You just have to work a little harder. Now, I'm going to come back to my dairy farmer buddy who has those extraordinary cows that aren't just for lactation anymore.
(39:54) Now, they're working their way into the herd. And he he has a 30% pre rate. His jerseys had a 40% pre rate. And it always bugged him that the jerseys had such a higher pre rate, right? But I said, "The jerseys don't have the same capacity as your Holings, right? The Holings energetically are putting out a whole lot more than the jerseys ever thought of.
(40:15) Um so that probably creates more of a demand. Um but what he did say along the way is he said I do he said I do think with some of these high genomic animals that we are seeing a little more lag in their ability to get pregnant. But what that probably means and this is comes back to a comment I made this morning and and then I'm I'm going to be quiet is that I think this is where we have to think about fat and fatty acids.
(40:42) There's very good literature about particular fatty acids that will stimulate, you know, um, development in the ovary, function in the ovary, hormones, and everything that goes with it. So, what that tells me is if we get these higher producing cows, we have to again keep thinking that fats not just a bucket of energy, but that she has a particular fatty acid requirement to do that.
(41:08) probably some of the longer chain essential fatty acids are going to be necessary in that cow at that point to be able to allow for normal ovarian function, you know, and and get that taken care of, right? So, that just drives this idea of we're going to have to do a better job of thinking about more precisely her requirements on the fat side just like we do on the amino acid side um to keep those functions um going as as well as they should.
(41:36) And you know, if I can just add to that, you know, I think one of the comments you've made several times, Mike, is by amino acid balancing, you see improved energetic efficiency. And I think that may be one of the subtle differences between your question, Neil, between, you know, the the athlete of a cow and the athlete of a human is that by getting amino acid balance right, you can improve the energetic efficiency.
(42:03) Uh there are some nice studies out there um that show certainly in limited data that things like methinine can increase lipid droplets in the developing um embryos and giving more energy to to that embryo to allow implantation. So, you know, I don't think it it's a simple answer, but I think energetic efficiency and some of the effects direct or indirect of amino acids, on lipid droplets, on inflammation have a positive impact on fertility and may may negate some of the negative effects of of driving milk yield. And it's it's that important
(42:45) balance. >> We got a question back here. >> Yeah, sorry guys. Me again. Um, bit of a two pass. I mean, do you think that the response from amino acids in UK diets will be a touch lower given our considerably lower starch contents and obviously that leads to a lower bypass starch level? Are we are we getting a much lower impact from that sort of amino acid sparing effect from a glucanogenesis point of view? And are we sort of catabolizing a bit of that amino acid potential? I mean, Sean, you put up some classic UK diets there at 17 and
(43:20) 18% versus yours at 27 and 29, Mike. So, what's the what do you think the link is there? There's no doubt that you know you know anyone who's worked with me will know that I'm a believer in starch driving milk yield in UK diets you know and thankfully we've seen a move up in in average starch content in UK diets you know over my career there is an impact but I think the the key point would be there is an absolute requirement for those amino acids And I don't believe we are limiting our response to amino acids by having too
(44:03) low a starch. I think we start from a lower base generally in terms of amino acids as I've said before because we don't feed blood meal and that gives opportunity for response and you know I I will consistently say yeah that wherever I have used you know what I call true amino acid balancing so lysine and methane in combination we see milk yield response responses in the UK and you know significant milk yield responses you know I talking to someone at lunchtime today and you know they were talking about where where we rebalanced that and
(44:46) we got 3 to four kilos more milk and so I don't believe the UK response will be less because of it because we're starting from a lower base I I agree yeah I don't starch to me starch is interesting I don't think it's the driver, right? Yes, you're going to get more appropriate, you might get more milk volume if you can get more starch in there.
(45:11) But I think as long as you stick to that that concept that we talked about where hey if if you're at um you know I forgive me I'm g have to do this in mcalss but if you're if your diet if your cows are intaking 60 mcals I don't really think it's important whether that's partitioned between glucanogenic acettogenic or lipogenic type you know um substrates because I think the way we we develop that is independent of that partitioning.
(45:42) So, they've got that requirement. That's their requirement, right? Um Sophie Lamaska at INRA has challenged me several times. She she ran a study in in jerseys where she infused starch where she didn't really change the diet and and you know, you would expect all the downstream things, right? You got a little more glucose, you got a little bit more insulin.
(46:04) You don't get a lot when you're infusing it. um and the in the efficiency of use of the amino acids increased, right? But she infused the starch postuminally. So it was no different than than Bowman's clamp because Bowman, if we go back to his clamps, we were feeding really terrible, terrible diets, dry diets.
(46:28) We could still get a 25% increase in protein yield with the signaling from the insulin. And I think that's what she's showing. The problem is is that if you take that same concept and you work backwards, if you fed the cow that same amount of starch, you're going to make propionate, you're then going to make some glucose that's going to drive more insulin, but you also made a bunch of bacteria, right? That upregulates.
(46:52) So, I think in the end, the efficiencies are the same, right? Because if you fed it, you're just going to move the whole thing up. But we can create these artificial conditions where we where we shortcircuit some of the natural behavior and we can see these things where it looks like hey you know you're getting something for nothing.
(47:09) So these efficiency because she would argue with me you need to have variable efficiencies and I said no I need an optimum right and I'm going to I'm still going to stick to that. So, I think, you know, no matter what your diet makeup looks like, we just want to stick to those those those numbers until we get better numbers and and they're going to respond.
(47:28) I I can't tell you how they're going to respond. I wish I could then I definitely could retire, but um if if we could figure, you know, but they're going to respond somehow. >> Yeah. If I can add on uh since I experienced two different production systems recently. Last year I was at WMadison conducting a research at 64 dairy cows and those cows in Wisconsin they were producing 60 kilograms per day and that was a research station not a commercial dairy farm.
(47:58) So we did a study there where we had to supply blood meal to meet the needs of those cows in terms of amino acids but the idea was to see the effect of room practine and methionine for some particular objectives and then I moved from Wisconsin to Switzerland where we have very high forage based diet and the starch was in in in zoric experiments was close to 17 18% but we were feeding at w medicine close to 29% starch.
(48:25) So but at when I moved to University of Zurich so we were conducting a study where we wanted to see rumin protected histadine having low energy or high energy tides. So surprisingly when we were feeding 29% starch in University of Wisconsin medicine and versus 18% starch here at Zurich in both scenarios the cows who were supplemented with additional amino acids they produced lot more milk. We are talking here two 2.
(48:50) 5 2.6 six kilograms more milk compared to the non-supplemented cows. So I I I agree with Mike and Sean that yes cows if you provide them according to the requirements irrespective of the starch content I think they're going to respond. >> So since you were talking about histadine there are couple of question aboutin and I mean I leave to you who do who wants to answer.
(49:16) So what would be a good source of inadin right now since there is not a real source of istadin and the other one is um I mean istadine is still an expensive amino acid uh would it be possible in future what's your vision about that >> I really don't know about the Mike probably would give you the insights of the application but when it comes to the research uh we have conducted balcom cam I mean two Chinese companies and everybody says we have room targeted histadine it's just we cannot launch commercially but uh we have tried one
(49:53) from China and we have tried one from Japan and in both scenarios room histadine it improved milk yield so certainly uh we really need to come up with a with a source of lysin which is cost effective and also uh acceptable in European market as well as in US market. So >> yeah, I I think the challenge and I think totally agree with you was you know if if you look at research papers you will see rim protected histadine from balm and a number of other suppliers.
(50:29) You know the technology exists it comes down to I would not claim to be monogastric nutritionist but there's not a great deal of histadine used in monogastric diets. So there's not a great deal of histadine produced in the world and the histadine that is produced tends to end up in aquafade and that has a fairly significant cost and therefore you know when companies like ours look at the economic response to histadine it is very marginal but histadine is coming and I'm fairly confident that you know within the next year or two you know there will
(51:08) be a um aminosure um H or Aminaur XH whatever the product is is branded um in the global market it's coming um you know when you hear Mike talk as he did earlier about you know the histine requirement even being higher than equal to methionine you know that immediately you you start seeing the response you know as Osman has commented there are there are trials There are meta analyses out there that show positive responses in terms of milk yield from supplementing histadine.
(51:46) But you know and I'll come back to that from a European diet point of view. Histadine is very much third or fourth limiting. So you know we we've got to address first and second limiting before we start pushing on to to third. But you know to me histadine will be the next commercial amino acid. Yeah, just to build on what Sean said, right? It's all about price and price is coming down.
(52:13) So, I'm a little more bullish about the time frame. So, all I'll say is stay tuned. >> Yeah, I'm I'm pushing this is not specific to histadine, but I'm pushing every amino acid supplier out there right now to think differently. It's a lot of work to make a rural protected uh amino acid. Um it's but the production of them, right? Part of the problem is we we get we get a break on the lysine and methionine because the monogastric species use them a lot.
(52:48) So there's a lot on the market. Histadine is what 16 cents a pound, 12 cents a pound or lysine is it's cheap, right? People are adding it to things just to increase the protein content because it's cheaper than protein. Um that's how inexpensive it is. What I would tell a bunch of these companies is we have to get to the point where we have commodity amino acids, right? And I' I've told a bunch of companies, you know, if if if we work out the details here and and I can show you that we would increase productivity
(53:18) of cows if they had to feed 20 to 40 grams of isolucine and lucine every day. And you think about how many millions of cows would require that. and that's going to improve the milk protein. Um, that's a that's a pretty good slug of of amino acids. Somebody should get into the amino acid production game alongside the protection thing, right? I mean, this I hear companies saying, I want to innovate. I want to innovate.
(53:45) I want to innovate. Okay, the innovation here would be get an amino acid production line and then go ahead and also predict protect it. So now you're vertically integrated and and you can own that market until somebody catches up to you. You guys hear that? Okay, >> that's my idea. >> But but I I think that's but it's I think the other thing about this though is we have to get to the point where the Forgive me people in the back and the table there, Kim.
(54:17) um the marketing people have to relent a little bit and because it needs to get to instead of these highlevel branded products that have such a premium sometimes, right? We've got to get to the point where they're a little more commoditized so we can get it into more mouths, right? I think it's one of those things where, you know, got to decide where your margin's at.
(54:41) is your margin going to be on volume or if it's going to be on on you know what what it is right now right so that's I know that's a different topic and it's been a long time since I've been on the other side of the table but I was there once and I understand that process so yeah we have to think differently >> message received Mike you know we'll pass it on to balm management if Osman if I can just ask you a question I think you you know your data was really good on the impact of lysine.
(55:12) Now I think I was right in saying that um the response of lysine of feeding ring protected lysene took 70 days in midlactation it was sooner if you fed it in in um early lactation you know any thoughts on on why the time period why it took 70 days? Yeah, I mean from the analysis point of view, we chose to be in the middle point of the data.
(55:41) So whatever data we had, 70 days was the median point. So we had to cut off at some point. So we decided to cut off in the middle. But from the lactation stage point of view, I guess my understanding is in the early lactation, I mean where cows are gradually increasing their dry matter intake, they're also losing lots of amino acid.
(56:01) So just think about she just uh uh give give birth to a young one and now she had this much uterus size and over the next 21 or 30 days she has to go under to the utrine involution where she's going to lost massive amount of amino acids because she's going to lose lots of utrine tissue in terms of loia and all other things and also uh in early lactation cows are going to uh lose body weight uh they're going to they're going to undergo proteolysis.
(56:27) So that's probably one of the reason that in a relaxation cows respond much more uh to the supplementation of amino acids and probably that's the time when cows are in the need of much more balanced ration in terms of amino acids but when it gets to the middle lactation yes they also start improving their body condition score on the same side they are consuming much more balanced and steady uh and consistent dry intake so I think yes that's why we we observed and a a more magnitude in terms of milk in a dilactation compared to the middle
(57:00) electation. >> Do you think some of it is to do with um amino acid if I can use the term amino acid storage in terms of muscle mass and it takes a while to to replete stores if you feed it later in lactation? >> Yeah. U I I would say that specifically histadine. So histadine can come from the uh from the from the muscles.
(57:25) It it is stored there. So yes, it's possible that in the mid lation that cows can utilize their uh stored amino acids to partition towards the milk synthesis. But in early lactation, I I believe that's the time when uh cows are deficient not only in energy but also in vitamins, nutrients, micronutrients uh among them amino acids is the major chunk I would say.
(57:46) Yeah, Sean, you were one of our featured speakers. I want to, as we get ready to close here, give you an opportunity to kind of give us an overview of what you discussed today in your presentation. My presentation today was to very much about putting the the practical um ration situation, you know, putting the science into practice and putting some some real um UK, Northern European diets, showing where there was limiting amino acids and showing that in, you know, all the diets I showed, I think I showed 100% grass silage, 50/50 grass
(58:26) maze and 3070 grass maze. And in all of those diets, um, real UK and European diets, methane was first limiting, but closely followed by lysine and and histadine, I think, was first limiting in, sorry, third limiting in two of those three diets. and it it shows the the opportunity but I I would say you know typically those diets were about 75% um requirement for methionine 82 83% supply limited for lysine and then histadine was in the 90%.
(59:07) So it shows the potential response of of balance of true amino acid balancing um of lifting all amino acid supply in terms of response. And I show practical numbers where we have trial data where we have increased um milk yield and milk solage yield through amino acid balancing and shown economic responses. And then I talked about the role of the balm aminoore products in terms of um consistent um bioavailability and TMR stable products and talked about how you for using science for methane methane method to demonstrate um good
(59:57) bioavailability and also talked about lysine and particularly the new Aminoure XL that we will bring to Europe very soon and um the bioavailability of that and the data behind that and it is all about you how to use amino acids practically to deliver economic returns for uh European dairy farmers and and that's key you know any of this has to have an economic return and it it's about truly balancing amino acids All right. Very well.
(1:00:36) Stephano, any big questions that we we we should ask before we leave here? >> Yeah, there there's a question that is uh that Daphne pose. I don't know if Daphne wants to uh go ahead with that uh about uh the relationship between methane as mental donor. Basically, some says that uh choline can replace methionine.
(1:00:58) Is that true? uh what are the best practice uh related to calling amethyining during transition? >> Yeah, I mean the short answer is they cannot replace each other and the long answer is uh if you see the pathway in the choline metabolism. So yes, methionine can get into acid inosyl methionine and it can transfer three methyl donors which can synthesize ultimately phosphatadylcholine but choline has some benefits in terms of uh hippatic metabolism.
(1:01:34) So I believe at the moment we have 26 experiments and we have a very clear and there is no question about that choline improves hippatic tissue metabolism while improving the productive performance and uh I think among 26 experiments uh 12 out of those specifically targeting the effects of choline in reducing the fat accumulation in in liver.
(1:02:02) So choline was able to reduce the triglycerides from the liver. But none of the studies at least I'm sorry if I'm I'm mistaken but none of the studies clearly shows that methionine was acting as a lipotropic agent. Yes, methionine has much more role in terms of memory protein synthesis and improving productive performance.
(1:02:25) But from the from the data point of view, I don't remember any paper where they supplemented methionine and then methionine reduced the accumulation of triglycerides in the liver. On the other hand, choline where we conducted some very cool experiments at University of Florida. So we really induced negative energy balance in cows. So we applied the feed restriction model.
(1:02:47) So we induced fatty liver development in the cows. So cows were healthy and we provided the feed at liitum and then all of a sudden we cut their feed to 50% or whatsoever they needed. So they developed fatty liver and then we supplemented uh on top of that with choline and uh not only of Florida Dr. Bar grammar from W medicine, Barry Bret from Michigan.
(1:03:08) I think there is very much clear data available that choline reduces accumulation of triglycerides in the liver reducing fatty liver and that's how choline improves the productive performance. Another aspect of choline is with related to memory epithelial cells. So there is very cool data coming up showing that if you supplement choline during the transition period uh it probably increases the memory epithelial cells.
(1:03:35) That's why even if you stop supplementing choline after transition period the cows keep producing uh 2 kilograms more milk for the next uh 25 to 40 weeks in lactation which tells that choline supplemented cows they carry over uh carryover effect. So yes, again back to the point that they cannot replace each other uh and both nutrients are necessary uh because they have uh several different roles to play.
(1:04:03) >> Thank you Osman. I would absolutely agree with that and I would just you know add briefly that both methionine and choline are essential nutrients for the dairy cow you know both the pre-carving and the the well the postcarving dairy cow and they both have separate needs and separate responses and you know there is clear um economic benefit of supplementing choline and methan ing to the cow to give you performance benefits because they are essential required nutrients.
(1:04:42) And if we're going to optimize genetic potential of these cows, the nutritional potential to to achieve the the genetic potential, we have got to meet their requirements for all nutrients and that includes choline, methane, and and others. >> Yeah. The other thing I'd add to that, Sean, is that right, from a pure economic perspective, if you're just looking at methyl groups, choline has three, methionine has one.
(1:05:09) Choline's less expensive than methionine. So, right, cost per unit of methyl donor, choline wins if that's what you're looking for. So, um, Ryan, was there a real quick question back there? >> I Yeah, I had one quick question came up over lunch. We were having a discussion. and I think it's very germanine to everything we were talking about and that is it's really for Mike.
(1:05:31) So, we've got everybody in the audience has a bunch of different products, feed additives they're trying to utilize in the ration balancing system. from your perspective in CNCPS, how do you get those products into the library and does is it user beware and company just sends you the profile and you just put it in or do you scrutinize that required research and then the second part of that is if you're using a commercially available program NDS AMTS is there any difference between that feed library and what you have in the base CNCs.
(1:06:14) >> Wow, that's a complicated question. How much time do we have left? Um, >> getting close. >> Yeah, I know it's getting close. I I I'll try to give you a quick answer. If somebody comes to us and says, "We want to put the product in the library." I always ask them, "What what do you want? Is this um I I think the hardest part about this is is it a is it a nutrient product or does it have non-nutritive behavior? And that's so that's the first line we draw, right? If it's a nutrient, great.
(1:06:48) Here's the chemistry you need. Here's our curation fee, right? We charge $2,500 to put a feed in the library because we have to do a whole lot of work and make sure that it's right and we got to summarize a bunch of feed chemistry. If we're going to have to do some feed chemistry to help you, we'll charge for that.
(1:07:04) But we don't charge any more than a commercial lab. Um because we want it in there and we'd like to make sure if we're going to put it in there, it's correct. Right? And that's for that's for something that's nutritive. If you tell me you want to put this enzyme system in there and this enzyme um increases NDF digestibility by 12% um then I want to see every piece of data you've ever ever generated and that piece of that data should include some cow studies.
(1:07:38) I don't want to see just in vitros or continuous fermenttors. I want to see some cow responses. If you can't do that, um, I'll put it in there as a placeholder, but we're not going to do the rest of it because I've got to see some data that I know I can trust and it has it has the interaction with the cow, right? Um, about the other feed libraries, right? That that's I'm this is this is a this is a really complex thing.
(1:08:11) So, so we build the reference library. It's got about 1300 feeds in it right now. It's a lot. It's the bane of my existence um relative to the CNCPS because it takes so much to manage and we we get more all the time. We're probably adding four to six feeds a month at least. Um everything has to be evaluated, tested, you know, and it's an iterative process.
(1:08:36) You know, if you guys hand me something, you know, you're going to give me the data. I'm going to give it back to you. I'm going to show you what it looks like. you're going to say yes or no, we're all going to agree to it, right? Um there are companies that won't come to us because they don't want that level of scrutiny.
(1:08:53) So, they will go to some to the license holders and they will ask to put their feeds in there. Um I always tell them you can do that, but please don't put it in the reference library. Put it in another page. Put another category. uh because I don't want the you guys as users or whoever the users are coming back to me saying we made a mistake, we did something wrong, that's not right, whatever.
(1:09:16) This is on if you're going to put it in there, that's on you, right? There's a very fuzzy line there, you know, cuz I I feel a lot of times that we're the people see us as the policeman, right? And I don't like being in that role, but I don't want to put out false information, right? because then that just just screws the whole thing up because we work too hard to make sure this thing gives a pretty good answer, right? And and if we can't give you that information, um that's a problem.
(1:09:46) >> Yeah. Thank you very much for joining us today, gentlemen. You guys been great. Uh to our studio audience, don't get this very often. Thank you for uh joining us today. This has been a lot of fun. To our loyal audience out to our loyal listeners, uh thank you for joining us as well. Hope you learned something.
(1:10:04) I hope you had some fun and I hope to see you next time here at Real Science Exchange where it's always happy hour and you're always among friends. Cheers.