Rethinking Immunity in Transition Cows: Are They Truly Suppressed - Dr. Lance Baumgard, Iowa State - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lqTkX5ZGIeE

Transcript:
(00:08) Good evening everyone and welcome to the real science exchange the podcast where leading scientists and industry professionals meet over a few drinks to discuss latest ideas and trends in animal nutrition. So we're here uh back with with uh one of the favorites Dr. Lance Bumgard Iowa State University. We're going to be reviewing a uh webinar that he gave earlier and it was titled Rethinking Immunity in Transition Cows.
(00:34) Are they truly suppressed? So, Lance, you're pretty good at being a bit controversial and I think this one the the title certainly sounds controversial as well. So, looking forward to kind of digging into this. Lance, before we get started though, real quick introduction of yourself and I think you got something unique in your class tonight.
(00:53) Why don't you tell us about that? >> Yeah, thanks Scott. It's great to be back. I am drinking some gin today. The gin is in a uh South Nutrition CL glass. Um bourbon, but I know it's not obviously bourbon, but and the gin is um I'm a small partner with my cousin on a local distillery in Alexandria, Minnesota called Ida Graves.
(01:19) And so we have a gin which I think is a really nice tasting um lor. And I would encourage you that if you want some you can order them online or stop into the distillery. We have a a tasting room. We have a cocktail room. So it's called IDA Graves Distillery in in Alexandria, Minnesota. And we just dropped our first bourbon.
(01:43) So the first barrel got opened up a couple weeks ago. So if you're into bourbon, um, give it a shot. >> So that's IDA Graves. You spell it I D A G R A V S. >> That's correct. It's on, uh, right next to Lake Ida. >> Okay. >> There's thousands of lakes up there, of course. And right next to a graveyard. So they they named it Ida Graves. Yeah.
(02:07) >> All right. Very well. And and then the website again is that what? idraares.com. >> Yeah, idiggraves.com. >> All right. Excellent. So now I'm not a big gin drinker anymore. After I graduated from college, that was kind of my drink of choice. And I, you know, there is a lot of different flavors when it comes to gin, Lance.
(02:28) And so how would you describe this one? >> Yeah. So this one, of course, you have to have a certain number of uh a certain concentration of juniper berries. I don't want to call it jin. Um so there's different types of gin. is real juniper intense, right? Um, hang tang for example would be very intense juniper flavor.
(02:53) Ours is kind of on the opposite side of that. It's a it's a I think in my opinion a smoother gin gin than tangar. I like tangar as well, but ours is a much more um not as strong of a flavor. It's something that you could drink on ice. So yeah, give it a shot if you like gin. >> Good deal. Well, I'm a bourbon drinker, so I need to know more about the bourbon.
(03:17) Is it Is it available today on the website? >> It is. It is. And like said, they only opened the first barrel um recently. So, I think you can I think you can buy that uh online. >> And what do you call that? >> Id Graves. >> It's the Graves bourbon. Just I gra bourbon. And then And have you had some of that yet? >> No, I have not tasted it yet.
(03:38) >> So, you're not going to be able to tell me what it tastes like? All right. I guess I'm going to have to find out for myself. Land. >> Yep. Exactly. >> All right. I'll be on there later this afternoon. Hopefully I won't be your first bottle. >> Nor the last. Hopefully. >> Exactly.
(03:54) Uh Lance, I see you brought a guest with you today. Would you mind introducing your guest for us and and let us know how do you know Dr. Fry? >> Yeah. So, Dr. Fry and I have known each other what about 10 years or so. And what what I really like about Bob is so when I first started coming up with these ideas and had enough guts to start talking about them and writing about them, you know, a lot of people would recoil and they weren't even open to different way of thinking, but um Bob was and so we would talk face to face uh you know via email via texting say
(04:29) hey really like the way you're think but maybe maybe think of this differently or that differently or this is what I see in the field because Bob's a veterinarian and a nutritionist. So, he had a lot of practical insight and really was um important to me 10 years ago, seven years ago when I started putting these pieces together and and creating some thoughts.
(04:53) So, I just uh I've liked Bob and admired him for a very long time and he's got a unique background that a lot of people in our industry don't h have. So, I thought it'd be perfect to have him on and get his thoughts and insights. >> You know, there's another aspect of Bob that you didn't mention as well. He's also a dairy farmer.
(05:11) It's understand he's got some Jersey cows. Uh uh Bob, why don't you tell us a little bit about about yourself and tell us about your farm? >> Sure. Well, Scott, thanks uh thanks for having me join this group. Uh, I guess I would start by saying u my my story is not as decorated as Lance's is, but it's much longer. So, uh, so maybe if we could put those two things together, we'll come up with a uh pretty good podcast today.
(05:44) Um, as Lance said, I'm a veterinarian. Uh, started a long time ago and in the 70s and 80s, I had a traditional dairy veterinary practice. Um, but as we moved into the 80s and 90s, I was getting more and more questions about dairy nutrition. And eventually I realized that uh I could have a greater influence over animal health, cow health through nutrition than I could through traditional veterinary medicine.
(06:14) So beginning in the 2000s, I was uh full gas working on dairy nutrition and uh today that's what keeps me fully occupied. In addition, as you mentioned, uh my wife and I do have a small Jersey dairy herd, milked by a robot. Uh and that certainly keeps me busy when I'm not doing uh my real job. >> Very well. Well, welcome. >> Another another connection that we have is that Bob is family friends with the horse the horse clan and Ron of Ronhorst fame and Ron was literally my next door neighbor and you know the father of hypocalcemia milk fever right so it was
(06:56) um we have this connection unfortunately Ron passed away a couple years ago but >> so Bob I understand you've got something in your glass today now it it is early. Uh true true testimony here. It is early in the morning. So, uh we're not all drinking like Lance is, but uh so tell us a little bit about what's in your glass.
(07:21) And if the if you did have an adult beverage in there, what would you mix with it? >> So, yes, Scott, in my glass this morning is some tart cherry juice. And I drink uh tart cherry juice. It has no sugar in it. I drink or no alcohol in this particular one. I drink chart cherry chart tart cherry juice u post exercise. It's u very high in anti antyanins which are powerful antioxidants and also uh high in various anti anti-inflammatory compounds.
(07:54) So you'll see uh professional athletes drink cherry juice post uh strenuous exercise and uh not that I exercise to the degree they do. I try to emulate some of the practices they uh recover with. So, tart cherry juice. If I were to put something in this, it would have to be uh vodka. Uh and I would say it would have to be a potato vodka.
(08:18) >> Okay. Lance, do you make any potato vodka yet? >> We make we make a vodka, not potatoes, but we make it from actually honey. >> Okay. >> Okay. and distilling uh or getting honey to ferment is quite difficult, but my my my partner Brock is a fantastic distiller, so he he's figured it out. >> All right, Bob, you may have to try some of that in your tart cherry juice next time.
(08:44) >> Okay. >> All right. And we've got Dr. Ryan Prowley. Ryan uh is a newly minted um Balm technical service manager. Ryan, tell us just a little bit about yourself. Um, as Scott said, I am a technical services specialist going on five months now with ball chem predominantly serving the Midwest region. Uh, previously was at the University of Wisconsin Platville as a professor and before that trained by Dr.
(09:14) Heather White at the University of Wisconsin Madison. I call southern southwestern Wisconsin home and uh my family farms also in the state uh in the central area at uh cells probably dairy. >> All right, thank you Ryan. Gentlemen, really looking forward to this podcast. So Dr. Bumgard rethinking uh uh transition cow im immunity uh are they truly immunosuppressed? So tell us about that.
(09:42) What were some of the key things you talked about uh during your webinar? The economics of feeding reassure precision release choline. Reassure is fed during the transition period. And because it's fed for such a short period of time, it costs just $15 per cow. And yet, the benefits will continue to generate income throughout the year. Cowsfed reassure produced 5 lbs more colostrum which pays for your reassure investment on the very first day of lactation.
(10:18) Cowsfed reassure also produce 5 lbs more milk per day every day. That means after the first day, every day is payday. Invest in reassure during the transition period and recoup your investment on the very first day of lactation. After that, you got it payday. Yeah. Well, maybe maybe we could start with the the genesis of of the idea or the concept that they are suppressed and that that of course comes from something that everyone in the industry agrees about and that morbidity the incidence of morbidity is highest in early lactation, right? u mastitis occurrence
(11:04) obviously metritis um das all these things the incidence is highest in those first 20 30 days of of milk right so then the question is well why why is that and um in 1979 there was a paper written by uh the UK group the first author was Hill where they um caused mastitis experimentally caused mastitis And at that time they they they uh discovered that neutrfil infiltration to the mammary gland was slower was not as quick in early lactation as it was to late lactation.
(11:46) And so they they um made the assumption that maybe there's an issue maybe there's a problem with the immune system in early lactation. Uh even though that actually has not been repeated very much, there's very inconsistent effect. Uh long story short though, then um the Iowa State group uh Jim Roth, Ron Horst, Mark Curley, and Jesse Goff um picked that information picked that up in the mid 80s and really have done a nice job of of um studying the the transition period and in particular the the immune systems functionality during
(12:33) the during the transition period. But so that's kind of the the origin, Scott, right? We know cows are sick more frequently in the early stages of lactation. Why is that? Could it be that they're simply immune suppressed? So that that's kind of been the the dominating theory now for going on 40 40 years. >> So I'm kind of curious uh just kind of few things.
(13:00) I know enough about immunology to be dangerous, but um what causes there to be less neutrfils migrating to the memorary gland, right? I mean, I know that has to do with el selectin and chemotaxis and but what's what causes all that? Well, that's that's kind of the um the the general thought process is is that the cortisol surge, but there's a couple reasons, but let's start with the cortisol.
(13:30) Um in fact we we can the model of immune suppression that Dr. Mark Curley came up with is where you'd give cort um dexamethasone for uh I think twice a day for three days and of course that that's a that's a model of mimicking the the stress of the cortisol surgery on cavi and what that does then is decrease the abundance of el selectin on neutrfils and they need l selectin to leave the circulation and get infiltrate into a tissue So the thought process was well hey we know there's a cortisol surge at cving.
(14:05) We've known that for a long time. Maybe that's naturally then uh causing neutrfils to have less capacity to infiltrate into a tissue like the meamry gland. Right? So that the cortisol was a big part of that. Um in addition others um think that the the metabolic metabolism that dominates the transition period high nephas high ketones and low calcium independently xvivo you can you can look at neutrfll function most of most of this is done in neutrfils um and neutrfll function appears to go down when incubated in these either lowal
(14:52) calcium, high nephas or high ketones. So there's you have kind of two two angles of why they appear to be suppressed. You have the cortisol angle, then you have this metabolic do, you know, this the the metabolism changes that occur that appear to be causing neutrfil dysfunction XIO. So there's kind of two uh like I said two two ways of thinking about why they could be suppressed.
(15:22) So if they're not uh so so rethinking it. >> Yeah. >> Let's talk a little bit about why maybe they are not uh imunosuppressed during transition. >> Where did that come from? >> Well um primarily it comes from you talking to guys like like Bob and just sitting back and looking at really high producing herds, very successful herds, right? And I'm not an immunologist, right? I'm barely spell the word. And but sit back.
(15:57) Okay, we know we know when a when a person or animal gets sick, it's not it's a combination of a variety of things. And the two most obvious ones are okay, how immune competent is the animal and what's the pathogen load the animals facing, right? So, you know, just because you catch a cold doesn't mean you you're immune suppressed.
(16:22) Maybe you were sitting next to someone on a plane that had a cold that had a virus. Um, so just because you catch a cold when you're when you've been on a long plane ride that, you know, doesn't mean you automatically have been mean suppressed. Maybe you're just exposed to an antigen that caused you to be sick. And I think maybe we needed to step back from the transition period and say, "Hey, you maybe they're not immune suppressed.
(16:49) Maybe they're just more exposed to pathogens at a very small window of time, right?" And in fact, I gave this talk um or talk similar to this at Cornell and Bob and I were talking afterwards and he was the one who's like uh because I really Yeah. Anyway, Bob Bob is the one who said, "Hey, maybe they're just simply more exposed to different stressors and antigens.
(17:11) " Uh, obviously during cving and the most common one here, of course, is metritis. All right, there's three epithelium I think we need to think about. Um, the uterus, the memorary gland, and the gut. And all three of these are going through really rapid and dynamic changes in a very small window of time that I think maybe makes them more susceptible to a to a pathogen.
(17:37) >> Bob, tell us a little bit about that conversation. You'd listen to the presentation there at Cornell. Um what were some of the questions you had for uh for Lance? >> Yeah. Well, yeah, he makes a very strong argument uh when when he looks at the biology and and various uh blood metabolites to measure uh immune suppression or lack thereof.
(18:04) And so it it seemed kind of obvious to me that uh we're not really dealing with immune suppression, but we're just uh we have a heightened immune challenge uh around caving time. and actually I would say an unfair immune challenge to uh to a very hyperactive immune system. And so in spite of the hyperactivity of the immune system, I have to ask myself, well, is it nothing to do with the immune system, but it's all this added challenge that we're put adding to the situation.
(18:37) So that's um that's the way I see it. And uh I think Lance's work in the laboratory uh certainly supports that. So it's uh it's a good fit with what we see in the field I believe. >> Yeah. One of you know I mentioned it earlier but there's a couple things I wanted to I guess to be emphasized. One is um the more large not large the more successful dairies I get um acquainted with the more I start rethinking these whole ideas we have in dairy science right and um because good successful dairies are doing things that
(19:23) don't fit well with our traditional way of thinking right and for the other way I'd like to think about is is just evolution, right? What would mother nature want? And what I mean here, guys, is okay, if there was some immune suppression in in the transition period, that would obviously uh not benefit the mother and certainly not benefit the offspring, right? If if arguably a mother's most important few days of her life are when she gives birth and if she was immune suppressed and more susceptible to disease, then she's not
(20:04) only that's not only great for her well-being but also her offspring. And I just don't think mother nature would create a system create favor uh a system where that would be the case. So, Lance, um I kind of heard you say that similar thing at the uh Cornell Nutrition Conference and I I got to thinking back uh about this whole evolution idea and um I always say uh or always remember that the cow or cattle survived the pleosene ice age three million years ago. Okay.
(20:47) And I kind of imagine that her innate immune system has not really changed too much in those three million years. Okay. So if we think of the innate immune system not having changed, I then um thought about it in in the work that I do and what have I seen change over the years. And so I keep track of a lot of data on a lot of different herds, but I have three herds that uh have had a significant change in management where we've kept track of various metrics over the years.
(21:31) So I decided to go in and look at mritis in these three herds and uh over 15 years I've got just a little over 100,000 cvings. All right. And if the immune system hasn't changed in 3 million years, I doubt the immune system has changed in these last 15 years on these 100,000 cavings. Okay? But if I use mitritis as a proxy for uh immune wellness, okay, something has changed, right? Or maybe not maybe I shouldn't say immune wellness, but just wellness in general.
(22:13) So um so I went back and did a little math and on these 100,000 uh cvings there was a 21.3% rate of mitritis prior to a management change and the management change was building and designing a new transition barn. Far off dry cows, close-up dry cows, and fresh cows all in the same barn. Um, post newborn, post construction, we've got about 60,000 cvings and the incidence of metritis is 9.7%.
(22:52) And I'm going to say no change in the immune system, the innate immune system. Okay. No change in nutrition. I was doing the nutrition before and after. Um, but there was a significant change in the environment. Okay. Stocking density was lowered. free stalls were welld designigned, well bedded. Uh there was a designated cving area.
(23:16) Um hygiene was improved and certainly uh metritis as a proxy for wellness uh and was reduced by more than half. So uh yeah, it kind of tells me it's not the immune system, it's all the other things that we do to the cow or the way we manage cows. I think you're um that's a that's a great example.
(23:42) You know what I mentioned earlier, Scott, right? The stepping back 30,000 feet and looking at data like Bob just got done describing and then using that say, okay, hold on. If it was immune suppression, then really it didn't shouldn't matter, right? We shouldn't have these regional differences or differences pre and post a new barn.
(24:04) So I think that's a great great piece of applied practical pragmatic information that also then like Bob said challenges us the idea. >> All right. So it's not the immune system. It's the challenges that we've uh right the immune system hasn't changed but the challenges we put these cows uh into have changed dramatically right since how many ever million years ago.
(24:30) So, so Bob, where where do you start? You know, as you're consulting with a dairy farmer, uh, and you're looking at the the three tissues that that Lance uh talked about, the uterus, mammogram gland, and the gut. Where do you start in in one, maybe diagnosing problems, and then putting some uh measures in place to to reduce the these challenges? How how do you go about that? What kind of advice would you give dairy farmers and and nutritionists out there? Yeah, I think first you have to make the producer aware that he does have challenges relative to industry
(25:06) standards. Um and uh and then it's a matter of uh collecting the data um convincing the producer that uh they want to make change. I I'll never forget uh a producer that's uh that I worked for for many years. he's no longer with us, but he told me something I never forgotten and that, you know, I was trying to convince him to do something to change his management in some sort of way. And he says, um, he says, Dr.
(25:35) Fry, he says, um, I can do just about anything that I want to do on this farm. He says, your job is to convince me that I want to do it bad enough to make the change. So, I've never forgotten that. And so it does take some uh some work sometimes to convince the producer that the change is worthwhile.
(25:57) And uh if you can show them the economics behind it and you can show explain to them what their peers are doing and and the results that their peers are having uh getting them to change is not too terribly difficult. And then I think the next uh very important thing is to be sure you have a monitoring system set up to track the performance prior to the change and then after the change just as I described with uh metritis and new uh new facility design.
(26:25) >> So in terms of um these management considerations Bob uh you you mentioned with the transition facility hygiene uh I'll pitch it to you first Bob but also Lance I'd love your input. are what are the other management considerations we have to promote a uh a healthy environment from a immunological perspective beyond just uh a cleaner environment.
(26:51) Is there more that we can be doing for these cows? >> Uh first thing that comes to my mind Ryan would be stocking density. Um I yeah I really believe that uh if we especially on the pre-resh cow and the very very fresh cow if we can get the stocking density down to maybe 80% both stalls and headlocks uh we're going to see a significant change there.
(27:22) >> Yeah. Yeah. And I think exactly what Bob's talking about here is the stressors, right? And stock density is a key one. And so to your question, Ryan, about minimizing uh stressors, I think is is really important. And I like to use the uh very aid areas that uh of the world as an example. So I lived in Arizona for almost 10 years and I'm very familiar with that system and um The other u dogma is of course that heat stress causes immune suppression.
(27:58) So I think there's a lot of similarities between the transition period and the heat stress period. Anyway, um in the Midwest, Northeast, Southeast, we do probably see an increased incidence of mastitis during the summertime. And of course, that has long been blamed on uh immune suppression. Uh but you know typical dairies in the Midwest uh they they become wet you know they come the moisture content of the dairy goes up either because we're utilizing evaporative cooling or we're not and the cows are just drinking more so they make
(28:36) more urine anyway the farms get sloppy during the summertime so the environmental pathogen load goes up and if heat stress were to cause immune suppression well then the mastitis rates in Arizona and Israel should go through the rough during the summertime and in fact they don't they go down. Um, and I think so this in Arizona and Israel, the sun is so intense, the heat is so intense, right, that the ground that's not under shade is essentially it's almost sterile, right? The ground temperature is 180 degrees Fahrenheit.
(29:06) Um, so mascitis rates in those two regions go down during the summertime despite the cows being severely heat stressed. Now, metritis will go up during in those areas during the summertime, but I I chocked that up to cows cving early. Heat stressed animals usually cal four, five, six, seven days early, right? And if uh if you want to cause m metritis, have a cow cal early and that that'll give you a problem.
(29:33) But anyway, my point here is I think it's to to Bob's point, minimizing stress and minimizing pathogen load, I think, is really important. it to build off that and this just popped in my head and it's probably uh we don't have any answers to this but I think it's interesting to speculate. So when we talk about um reducing stocking density, I think it's interesting to think about uh do we think that the main mode of action for promoting this wellness is uh less uh stress between peers or is it that we've reduced the
(30:10) potential vectors or generators of this pathogen load in the fresh pen? >> Fair question. Fair fair question. Yeah. Um, yeah, I think you could argue uh both uh could have some influence. Um, you know, the uh the whole concept of all in all out pens for pre-cing goes to your point about uh you know less re reducing the pecking order that occurs when you put a new cow in a pen.
(30:43) Um, I think that's a that's a controversial topic. Uh, whether or not the uh it really makes a difference or not, uh, I'm not sure. >> Yeah. No, I I I think I also think that's a great question, Ryan. I think, you know, our group's been chasing stress now for a while and um I think the evidence strongly supports the idea that really any stressor, heat, overcrowding, off feed, etc.
(31:16) um creates a intestinal physiology event that allows there to be increased hypermeability. So, in other words, the gut becomes leaky. Um and then we have an immune response occurring inside the gut and um we also have a bu a large increasing amount of evidence suggesting that gut inflammation allows there to be hypermeability of the mammary gland which then I think makes it more susceptible to mastitis pathogens.
(31:50) So um but you're right right overcrowding increasing environmental pathogen load and now we have a mental stressor that's emanating its pathology in the gut which then I think contributes to increased chances of mastitis. >> Lance I just thought of another stressor and that's uh the way that people that work with the cows handle cows.
(32:15) Uh if if cows are intimidated by the, you know, stockmanship, >> uh guy that's coming in to pen, you know, is he carrying a a stick, a cane, or whatever, uh versus somebody that's uh comfortable with the cows and the cows are comfortable with them. That can make a big difference. >> It 100%.
(32:36) And in in addition to that, Bob, um a new a stressor that has been brought to my attention by a couple former students, Megan Aa and Brady Gates talked about parlor in the parlor. Um is it loud? Is it chaotic? Right? Is it dark? Um you know, I've been on on dairies where the parlor the u the compressor is below the parlor, right? So you can't even hear it. So the parlor is quiet.
(33:04) um well lit and then you go to some parlors, right, where the compressor is three feet away and it's so loud you can't even talk to the milker. I think these all things contribute. Calm dairies are typically high producing dairies. You guys have talked a lot about uh sorry Ryan, I'm going to elbow my way in on this on this one.
(33:28) You guys talked a lot about pathogen load and the influence there. What are some best practices for reducing path uh pathogen loads on dairies? Maybe Bob, we'll start with you. You've had a lot of practical experience doing that. >> Well, yeah, for sure. I mean, it's the pathogen load is pretty much uh in the manure. Okay.
(33:52) And so if we can uh avoid manure buildup, uh remove it, keep new bedding, uh yeah, just uh minimizing the manure contamination in the the area that the cows living. That's it's about that simple. I mean, we're not I don't think we're going to I don't know of any way that we can minimize the pathogen load that would be uh in the air or respiratory intake of pathogens.
(34:19) Um but yeah, clean, dry, well-bedded uh environment and then of course when it comes to the actual cving uh appropriate hygiene measures, especially if the cving needs to have some assistance. U >> all right, thank you Ryan. Back to you. Well, uh, the mention of, uh, Megan and Brady got me thinking about these papers out of Lance's group that I recently reviewed that they were co-authors on, I believe.
(34:54) And, um, when when you first mentioned the the three tissues at the beginning of the talk, Lance, uh, some a question I've had is does the tissue that receives the major insult matter? Do we have tissue specificity or maybe a vector specificity if you will in how an animal is going to respond immunologically? Like is metritis different than mastitis? Is leaky gut different from metritis? >> That's a that's a great question, Ryan.
(35:28) You're full of them today. Um one I don't have a good answer to to be honest with you. Um, yeah, I don't I don't have a good answer for you. >> What what got me on that path was um so the papers that I'm referring to is to the two companion papers with the IV LPS >> and then you had a follow-up study, I believe, where you did the inner memory in uh injection of LPS and it seems like you had like slightly different responses in some ways.
(36:03) I believe specifically with NEA and insulin >> are the two big ones that come off the top. >> Yep. Yep. So, uh those those three papers the lead author is Julie Openor and now she's a nutritionist in Pennsylvania for Perina. Um so the idea I'm glad you brought that up. The idea was that we really wanted to directly test midlactation cows 130 days in milk versus transition cows and how they responded to uh LPS.
(36:33) And so the first experiment we did IV and uh almost every measure of the immune system competence was increased more robust stronger in early lactation compared to late lactation. So it was totally um against what the traditional thought process was. Um, so then we wanted to get at more of okay, you know, rarely would a cow ever receive, you know, IV LPS.
(37:08) So we did a memory challenge of LPS to try to more mimic natural mastitis. Most things were, you know, similar to the IV. Uh, a couple things weren't. Um for example uh almost always when you give a cow LPS in during established lactation nephas go down. So there's certainly not any direct lipolytic activity of LPS in vivo.
(37:38) Uh that's probably due because LPS causes a massive insulin surge that prevents the uh lipolysis. Um but in early lactation that's not so much the case. uh you give a cow mass cause a cow to have mastitis, the evolutionary drive to make milk is still there, right? Once she gets in an established lactation, she can really control her energetic flow by turning off the tap.
(38:05) In other words, she just stops making milk, right? But early lactation, she still has the pedal to the metal and making milk because she's got to feed this baby. So, you go give a cow mastitis in early lactation, the pedal is still on the gas making milk. Well, how's she going to do that? Because she's gone off feed. Well, the only way she can do that, of course, is to mobilize tissue, skeletal, muscle, and and atapost tissue.
(38:30) Um, and so the insulin response to early lactation, uh, immune activation is much blunted. It's still there, but compared to a late lactating cow, it's it's minuscule. And the lack of insulin then allows her to mobilize atapost tissue. And I think this then has uh pragmatic input to our interpretation of the transition period, right? The uh the cow that has high nephas and um and ketones, but she's not doing well.
(39:02) In other words, she's not milking well. Uh I think so, we have this these two transition cows. One's eating like a rock star, milking like a rockstar, and she's got high nephas and ketones because that's the way mother nature intended her to make milk. Then you have this other cow that's um probably has some immune activation going on somewhere or maybe some multiple places, the gut, the mammary gland, and the uterus.
(39:30) She's not eating well and she's not milking well either, but she's still trying to make milk. And because she's not eating well, the only way she's going to be able to do that is to have high nephas, high ketones, and high bu. So I think it's really important when we sit back and, you know, look at these metabolic uh signatures of the transition period to really allow productivity to be your to be your guide.
(39:56) In other words, you recognize that this cow is healthy and you don't need to be a PhD or DBM to say, "Hey, that cow is making a ton of milk and looks great. And this cow over here is really struggling, right? And she also has high nepheas and high ketones and she's probably hypocalcemic as well. Um, that's the cow that needs Dr.
(40:15) Fry's attention, right? That's the cow that needs uh intervention somewhere. And I I think you're um I I I think the discussion you've generated around this topic has been really good because I'm ketosis is most of what I did in my PhD work and there we did uh a fatty liver challenge by feed restriction as part of my uh PhD dissertation.
(40:43) And there were there were some cows there that had high ketones persistently after treating and it seemed to be supporting milk production. So I I think there there is room to reflect on how like ketone bodies and how we've been diagnosing ketosis. Maybe it maybe we need to think of it more as a as a prediction model rather than a clinical case which is actually kind of how we develop these thresholds is as a prediction model for other negative outcomes not necessarily that they are in the disease state.
(41:21) So, it's like a metabolic stress state that puts them at risk, but if they're still making milk, well, though the BHB is doing its job, a good job. >> Yeah. And the the clinical significance of what you just mentioned, O'Brien, is the decision to to convince a farmer to spend money fixing the hyper ketomia. In other words, I think what you just hit on is so important, right? Because I come from a family of farmers.
(41:46) I don't want them spending money unnecessarily. So the if if you think hyperc ketomia is causing the disease, that's that's the important part here. Is is it causing the problem? Well, then I'm going to spend money to fix that. If it's just a a signature or a symptom or a reflection of something that could have gone wrong, now I'm going to use it as a guide.
(42:12) Say, "Hey, now I'm going to call the vet and say, "Hey, I got a problem going on." But fixing the hyper ketomia probably shouldn't be our first priority. It's like why is this cow hyper ketomic but she's not making much milk, right? She's clearly something is preventing her from eating as much as she wants to eat.
(42:31) And and so there's where the decision and money spending needs to come into place, not fixing the hyper ketomia across the board. >> So how do you know which one, Lance? Is is it is it what's causing is is it something needs to be fixed or is it something that's there because she's producing a lot? Well, I so that's it's funny you so I get this call from companies and and people all the time.
(43:01) What can I use as a biomarker to tell me, okay, Bombgard, if your story is right, how do I determine which one needs to be uh to have an intervention? What I think it's just milk, right? If she's a rock star and she's hyper ketomic, leave her alone. You don't need a fancy milkside test, blood test. If the farm has milk weights, use that and good oldfashioned cow knowledge, right? We got a cow that's, you know, Sorry, Bob, I interrupted you.
(43:39) >> No, that's that's fine. I was just going to add to the uh the milkweight thing. You know, many farms today have various monitoring systems. So you got ruminations, you got eating behavior, you got walking, uh milk production, and then just as you just said, the the husbandry skill of just looking looking at that cow, does she feel good or does she not feel good? You can you can kind of see it in her eyes.
(44:04) Uh she's got that glassy eyed look and ruminations are down. Boom. Then you got then All right. So you're going to expect that she has ketosis, but then you got to figure out why does she have ketosis? what's really wrong with the cow. Ketosis is just one of the symptoms. >> Exactly. 100%. And so I also understand the the the time pressures that vetinarians are on, right? You get to the farm, you got a cow that's just as you described, Bob, okay, she's going to be hyper ketomic.
(44:37) You could throw a bottle of dextrose into her and solve this hyper ketomia, but there really needs to be a whole body whole body evaluation to determine why is this cow not eating well. And you know, mastitis and metritis might be the two most obvious ones, but identifying gut inflammation, that's not easy. >> And and Lance, I would add, it's more than just the whole body.
(45:07) It's it's what's going on in the cow's environment. Is she in a pen and stocking density is way too high and she's she's uh timid, not going to the feed bunk. Does she have bad feet? Not going to the feed bunk. You know, there's a lot of things that could be going wrong with outside the cow. So to to reword that, what I'm hearing is it's especially for these cows that are high BHB down on milk.
(45:35) It's not just giving them propane glycol drench or a half bottle of Dex. It's also uh we need to find that next step to treating the other problem whether that's a subclinical mastitis or clinical mastitis or the the leaky gut or um leaky uterus scenario. >> Correct. At least that's how I look at it.
(46:01) And I think you could throw hypocalcemia in there as well. I think hyper ketoonmia and subclinical hypocalcemia are in the same kind of in the same bucket from with regards to do you treat not treat and are you using this as a as a marker hey something's wrong >> Lance uh where does your research go next right we heard Dr. Fry talking earlier that, you know, he needs help convincing his dairy farmers uh to intervene with some of these challenges.
(46:34) Um so where do you focus your research? Do you do you focus on on ways to reduce those challenges or or or do you focus on uh maybe uh partnering with an economist and and demonstrating the economic uh u outcomes of of preventing some of these challenges. just kind of curious what your thought processes are and where do you go? >> That's a good point.
(46:59) I I should talk to economists, but right now my group is focusing really on stress physiology and using different stressors um and to to to evaluate the physiological response to them. And one of the things that we're moving on from is instead of looking at individual stressors independently, stacking them together.
(47:20) Because I think you know there's a whole field of stress physiology in human in human biology and there's this concept called stack stressors where a human or an animal can typically handle one stressor at a time. Uh it's when they start occurring whether or not s on top of each other or back to back.
(47:39) That's when the animal starts struggling with responding to them. And of course in the transition period we have all sorts of stressors happening at the same exact time. Right? So to really start modeling and understanding better the stressors that occur during the transition period, we need to start um developing stress models that are have multiple stressors occurring at the same time.
(48:02) And that's what our group's kind of going down that route. And again, not to beat a dead horse, but I think most of the negative consequences of stress come from the gut. >> Okay, Bob, maybe I'll turn it to you. Uh, what what would you ask Lance to focus his research on to help you convince your dairy farmers that that they need to do some intervention? >> Well, Scott, I don't have a good answer, but I I can't wait to see what Lance comes up with next because I just his personality is is such that if if the if you tell him something is black, he's
(48:41) going to try to figure out why it's white. or if it's left, he's going to try to figure out why it's going the other way. I mean, you know, and um clearly uh I won't be in practice long enough to maybe see the next thing, but um I'll be around listening and watching it, Lance. >> Yeah, good deal.
(49:04) Gentlemen, as we kind of wind down here, is there any key things that we we we need to cover that we've not covered yet? Well, I I would um I would add that there there are people who think I'm crazy, of course, and my neighbor Mark Curley is one of them, you know. So, this is not a a you know, openshut case.
(49:30) I I think we're still obviously learning a lot about the transition period immunology and uh I I I could I could just be simply dead wrong. Who knows, right? Uh there are like I said a lot of my academic colleagues that do not agree uh with how we interpreted those opinion north papers right um so but to me I just keep going back to farmers right uh if I see scenarios where just like what Bob described with his clients you know those are the types of stories and and pieces of information that are on farm that guide I I think that guide the way we all scientists
(50:09) think and um so you know I think this is very early in the infancy of challenging the immune suppression dogma uh I I know there are a couple other groups one from Wisconsin uh looking at more of the acquired immune system and there's some mucosal immune system researchers looking at the same thing kind of coming to the same conclusion I would if I'm interpreting their papers correctly so Um, we'll see.
(50:39) I I would like to have us all back on this uh podcast in five years and see where we're at. >> Hope I'm here in five years, Lance. >> Hope we all in five years. >> Whether you're right or wrong, you know, I I applaud you for challenging status quo though, right? I think that's needed. That's needed in in whether it's academia or or or industry, right? Uh it's healthy and iron sharpens iron.
(51:06) So, uh, you know, I applaud you for doing that. So, so, so keep it up. Uh, we we appreciate that. Um, what what I'd like to do now, guys, is just kind of go around the room here and and have you guys give us one or two key takeaways that that the audience ought to really grasp and run with uh from this conversation today.
(51:27) And Ryan, if you don't mind, can I start with you? Tonight's last call question is brought to you by Niasure precision release Niain. Niacin is a proven vasod diilator for heat stress reduction and a powerful anti-bippolytic agent for lowering high blood neifa in transition cows. Protected with balm's proprietary encapsulation technology.
(51:50) You can be sure it is being delivered where and when your cows need it. Learn more at balm.com/niasure. Oh, well, hopefully I don't steal anyone's thunder. Um, well, I'm I'm a ketosis guy, so I'll lean into the ketosis thing. I I'll say uh that there's a lot of there's a lot of room to reflect here.
(52:14) And if we are going to if if we're investing in uh checking cows, testing cows, the ones in treating cows, the ones that we need to really pay attention to are those that not only have these these warning signs like high BHBs or high nephas, but also the ones where we're seeing a a a milk deviation or a low startup milk.
(52:35) Those are the ones that we need to give support. big advocate of propyline glycol myself, but really the the future of that is uh finding out the best way to treat some of the underlying causes. >> Yeah. All right. Thank you, Ryan. Dr. Fry, what kind of comments do you have for us today? Yeah, I think um as an industry both nutritionists and veterinarians, we need to work hard at uh changing the paradigm around trying to fix the immune system at cving because immune system's not broken.
(53:15) Lance has shown that it's uh actually hyperactivated around cving time. So, let's not try to fix something that's not broken, but uh let's work at removing a lot of biological challenges to the cow at cving time that are often triggered by uh management factors. Kind of the way I see it. >> All right, good. Thank you for that, Lance. Final words.
(53:38) >> Yeah, I'll I'll just add a little bit to what Bob and and both Ryan just mentioned is um removing the stressors, right? And so, um, stack stressors like overcrowding, um, maybe maybe some poor nutritional changes, um, pen hygiene, right? Keeping things dry and clean. I think that'll pay large dividends.
(54:06) um and and probably not spend as much time and energy thinking about immune suppression, but rather the other side of that equation is uh environmental pathogen mode. >> Makes perfect sense. Thank you for that, gentlemen. I want to thank you for joining us today. This has been enlightening.
(54:25) Lance hoped to do this in 5 years. So, we'll uh we'll we'll bring us all back for then. Uh to the loyal audience out there, thank you for coming along with us once again on this journey. I hope you learned something. I hope you had some fun. I hope to see you next time here at Real Science Exchange, where it's always happy hour and you're always among friends.
(54:45) We'd love to hear your comments or ideas for topics and guests. So, please reach out via email to an&h.marketingbalm.com with any suggestions and we'll work hard to add them to the schedule. Don't forget to leave a fivestar rating on your way out. You can request your Real Science Exchange t-shirt in just a few easy steps.
(55:06) Just like or subscribe to the Real Science Exchange and send us a screenshot along with your address and t-shirt size to an&h.marketingbalm.com. Balm's real science lecture series of webinars continues with ruminant focused topics on the first Tuesday of every month, monogastric focused topics on the second Tuesday of each month, and quarterly topics for the companion animal segment.
(55:30) Visit balchm.com/realcience to see the latest schedule and to register for upcoming webinars.