Short Stature Corn Hybrids: What we know so far on how they Impact Lactating cows: VandeHaar, MSU - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ATcPjFH_Eg

Transcript:
(00:10) Welcome to the next generation in chelated minerals. Introducing new kishir plus amino acid keelated minerals from balm. Kishir plus delivers a higher concentration of mineral with a superior amino acid profile. The higher mineral content adds formulation flexibility, opening up space in the ration and also reduces the carbon footprint.
(00:33) The superior amino acid profile delivers 28% protein from microbial biomass. The Khir Plus line also offers a granulated form for improved handling characteristics and reduced dust. Visit balm.com to see how new Khir Plus can deliver the added benefits you need to improve performance and reduce manufacturing hurdles.
(00:56) Hello everyone and welcome to the real science lecture series. My name is Kim Jones, a member of the marketing team with BLEM. Today we welcome Dr. Mike Vandar, Michigan State University to take a deep dive into short stature corn hybrids and what we know about their impact on lactating cows. Mike has been a professor of dairy nutrition at Michigan State University since 1988.
(01:19) is internationally recognized for his expertise in dairy cattle feed efficiency and teaches nutrition and mammorary physiology. Mike is actively involved in the American Dairy Science Association and currently serves as its president. His research focuses on improving feed efficiency, reducing methane emissions, and sustainabil sustainably feeding people.
(01:42) He led the multi-state project that added the feed saved trait to the US net merit index guiding the selection of more efficient cows. He also studies calf and heer nutrition late lactation feeding strategies and energy metabolism and contributed to the 2021 revision of the nutrient requirements of dairy cattle for the nationalmies.
(02:03) Mike welcome to the real science lecture series. The floor is now yours. One thing though, I'm no longer the president of ADSA. I am a past president, which is actually nice. It took a lot more time to do things like this. Thank you. [laughter] >> Okay. So, I need to I'll switch to uh There we go. Can you see my slides? >> They're coming up right now.
(02:28) There we go. Yes, we can. >> Okay. [clears throat] So I don't uh I'll just start with this preface is you know corn silage is not necessarily my expertise. I've done corn silage study before so this is my second one. Um energy metabolism is my expertise and um yeah the energy chapter in the new NASM was uh Bill Weiss and I worked hard on that one together and uh feed efficiency is something I'm unique or very interested in.
(03:02) So this is a study that we did a couple years ago. Uh just kind of happened to uh be at the same place as a group of folks from DELB at the same time. Uh I met them and they were interested in talk they were talking about shortc corn and I asked them more about it and I thought that sounds like something I'd like to to do a study on.
(03:22) So I'd like to just acknowledge my collaborators at MSU. Estio Sarm Kasagloo is a a postocck uh with me from Greece and Riley Barber's a master's student and then I'd like to acknowledge Bayer crop science for their support of the study and the short hybrids we'll talk about are theirs. [snorts] So I want to start off with why uh I care about this and that is that uh there's really no question about it.
(03:51) If you can get more milk from a cow, almost always she will be more efficient at using feed. If a cow produces only a little bit of milk, almost all of her feed is used for maintenance. Uh and over the last 100 years, we've increased feed efficiency uh dramatically because our cows now produce about 11,000 kilos or 23,000 pounds uh per year uh compared to about 4,000 pounds per cow per year 100 years ago.
(04:26) And a lot of that has been due to breeding and genetics. But but nutritionists have had to and and other management specialists had to keep up with the cows that we have. Okay. So as cows eat more and produce more per day, the proportion of their feed used for maintenance is diluted out by the proportion converted to product. Okay.
(04:43) So I want uh I want to feed diets that allow cows to eat as much as possible of the of the diet so they can produce more milk. And um a key to that is uh to to balance fiber and starch. Fiber is needed for room health. And I'm I'm sure most of you listening to this already know this, right? Fiber is needed for room health, but too much fiber can increase room fill and decrease feed intake and consequently milk production.
(05:12) And one way to look at it is is we could put uh uh fiber concentration as as NDF, neutral detergent fiber on the x- axis. And as you go from uh extremely high fiber to very low fiber, you'll see that that uh feed intake increases and then it can dramatically decrease if you if you don't have enough fiber. And energy intake is increasing too because you're feeding not only a more energy dense diet, but the cows can eat more of it.
(05:47) Uh and then forage fiber is generally more filling than nonforage fiber. So corn silage, alphalfpha, that fiber is more filling and takes longer to ferment and get out of the system than do most non-forage fiber byproduct feeds. And forages with greater fiber digestibility enable greater intake and milk production with less risk of rumal acidosis than high starch diets.
(06:19) So uh one way to look at that this is a table that was in the NASOSM 2021 uh I think in the carbohydrate chapter. So table 51 uh and you can see that the minimum forage NDF content on the left side there and then here's maximal starch and minimum total NDF. And the point I want to make is that that if we have a lot of forage NDF, we can have more starch.
(06:48) If we have less forage NDF, uh we can't usually put as much starch in the diet and we need to have more non-forage NDF in the diet. In Michigan, uh we love to feed corn silage. Uh we often feed diets that are very high in starch. Corn silage provides both the forage NDF and the starch. So feeding a 19 20% forage NDF diet along with 30 to even 33 34% starch is is pretty common.
(07:20) I know that in other parts of the country uh things are done differently and in later lactation um I also am interested this is for the the peak cows and then later lactation I'm also interested in feeding a little less starch so that I partition nutrients toward milk instead of body fat. So, when I think about how to feed a cow through the lactation cycle, and we will get back to this when we think about corn silage hybrids, um around parturation, my goal is just worrying about optimal health.
(07:53) If I don't have maximal milk, that's fine. I want to make sure the rin is healthy, the cow gets off to a healthy start on her lactation. Once you get to about three weeks into lactation, typically the cow is is uh taking off. And now I'm going to worry about maximum milk and I want to get her bread.
(08:12) Once she's bred, I still want maximum milk, but I want to have her in optimal body condition. So to think about how to do that, the first thing to think about is what are the things that limit how much a cow can eat around transition, we think that it's probably metabolic fuels. But during the peak of lactation and and at least half of lactation, intake is limited mostly by gut distension.
(08:38) So how much stuff is in the rin is what determines how much she can eat. And what I just talked about forage NDF is is is especially filling. That's when we really really worry about how much forage NDF and how digestible is that forage NDF. If I can have less forage NDF or forage NDF that's more digestible, typically the cow can eat more.
(09:03) So how do I feed a cow? I want to feed her minimum fiber during this peak lactation with high starch because high starch enables her to eat more. Uh and then as when I get to later lactation, I'd rather feed lower starch because starch promotes partitioning toward body fat. So I want to have less partitioning toward body fat. Uh but I would love to have digestible fiber throughout the the lactation except for maybe I don't worry about it as much in the very start.
(09:35) Uh high crude protein and room and undergraded protein early on. I can feed lusk protein and rup later on. Uh different fats throughout the lactation expensive supplements than cheap feeds. But what I really want to think about today is fiber and digestible fiber and forage NDF. So to do that before we get into short corns, uh my colleague Mike Allen who was uh well known for his work on corn silage, BMR thing factors that influence feed intake.
(10:10) That was really what his career was based on is factors that influence feed intake. um did a a study in uh the late 1990s, published in 2000, that showed the value of BMR corn silage. Okay, they had only a few cows in a Latin square design. But what they did was they fed a a BMR corn silage versus a control corn silage at two levels of starch.
(10:38) So, one was very high starch, 37% starch, 29% NDF with most of that NDF coming from forage and then a higher NDF diet. So, higher corn silage with 26% starch. And what they found was that in either case, BMR corn silage allowed cows to eat more total feed. And let's just drop down to fat corrected milk. When cows were fed uh BMR corn silage, they produced more fat corrected milk.
(11:10) This was especially true when we fed the low starch diet. Okay, less true when we fed the high starch diet. Okay, and there was almost there there was the interaction here is listed as non-significant, but it was borderline. Okay, so when did you really see an effect of BM or corn silage? When you fed a low starch diet.
(11:31) Once you got to a high starch diet, um, it wasn't quite as beneficial. Another way to look at this is if you use control corn silage, well, now you really need to make sure that you are feeding minimum silage, minimum uh, NDF and high starch and peak lactation. If you use BMR corn silage, you can use more BMR corn silage and it doesn't make much difference.
(11:58) One value of feeding more BMR corn silage or digestible fiber as opposed to starch is you see less body weight gain. This is useful for cows in late lactation. Okay. So the uh the thing I was interested in when I first heard about short corn from uh Ducal Aronomous is that that it seemed like it was more digestible.
(12:28) the forge NDF was more more digestible than uh conventional hybrids uh and perhaps even as good as BMR, maybe not. And also that the yields could be as high as conventional corn silages. So for me, the question was, is is shortc corn a cost-effective alternative for making silage for dairy cattle? We did a study where we had five uh hybrids.
(12:56) Um three were short corn varieties from Bayer. One was a tall corn variety that was decel. And then one was a Pioneer BMR corn silage. I think my Pioneer friends will say that's not the that's not the best BMR that's out there, but anyway, that's what we used in this study. Um, and um, I had the BMR in there kind of as a positive control, thinking it would have the highest fiber digestibility.
(13:22) Cows uh, that were limited by gut fill would be able to eat more of that and produce more milk. Tall would be the the the least that would be the negative control. And then we see where did the short falls out short corn silages uh, fall into that. Okay, we did there were five plots.
(13:41) I wasn't really involved with planting the corn. Uh perhaps I should have been more involved. I've been told that maybe we shouldn't have had just five plots. Maybe we should have had alternating rows throughout this field. But I will say that this was a a relatively small field, [clears throat] maybe 30 40 acres and we used uh 5.
(14:05) 4 acres for each hybrid. So the the the field was uh mostly Marlet fine sandom soils with a 2 to 6% grade. There were occasional spots that were once probably wet lands or wet fields but just small areas and the and the field was tiled. And we did this in a very dry year. This was a field that had been heavily fertilized with calmanor for years because right over here is the MSU dairy.
(14:32) You can't see it on the slide. Okay. During uh this was in 2023 was an especially dry year. Fortunately, we had great germination and uh the corn looked great despite uh the the very dry spring. Each hybrid was planted at 35,000 seeds per acre. Seeds uh grew well for a dry year. Corn was sprayed with broadleaf herbicide on June 28 and a fungicide on August 8th.
(15:05) uh the the uh I should have written on here. I think these are all 108 109 day hybrids. Uh the short varieties were harvested on September 21, the other two on September 22. Each uh they were all harvested into separate bags. Each bag was packed uh and and with and and mixed with an inoculation of vitus titanium.
(15:31) In December, samples were taken from the front and at two 20 foot intervals on the sides of each bag, sent to Cumberland Valley. And um samples within a hybrid were consistent uh with a CV less than 3% for NDF and CP. So what did we get for yield? Well, the tall corn silage had uh 8.7 tons per acre, BMR 7.6.
(16:01) That was kind of what we would have expected. And then the shorts were anything from 7.5 up to 9.3. Uh all of the corn was harvested uh at a pretty low cut, which was standard uh for Michigan State University's uh corn silage harvesting group. Okay. We didn't do anything special for this corn, but we harvest it relatively low.
(16:24) Uh our chopper uh does have a kernel processor. Okay. The NDF content of all of the uh corn silage was reasonably consistent. 33 to 37% crude protein. Uh 7 to 8% starch. All of them were 40% except for one of the shorts was 35. Uh the pH was good. the starch based on starch yield. I predicted grain yield. Uh anyway, the silages were all looked like they were in good they were in good quality.
(17:02) We did test for micotoxins uh at one point and uh there were probably a few more micotoxins than we would prefer, but there weren't any big differences between uh the hybrids and it did not seem to affect uh intake. Okay. Lgnon was 7.3% of the NDF in the tall hybrid, 5.9 for BMR, and then the shorts were intermediate.
(17:43) uh 30 hour uh in vitro NDF digestibility, 56 for the tall, 65 for the BMR, and the shorts were halfway between NDF digestibility. We also did in vitro uh NDF digestibility at different time points. Um I don't really think there's much to say here. The shorts were mostly intermediate between the tall and the BMR.
(18:13) Yeah, we also did insitu indepestability that was done at uh Cumberland Valley and the the shorts actually had higher insitu indigestibility at least the short one better than BMR. Uh short two is similar to BMR. They were all higher than the conventional at least at 48 hours. Okay, we didn't do 30 hours or but uh and at 24 there wasn't much difference.
(18:46) And then finally we did do invivo total tract digestibility uh during our first study and there were no differences between them but that's not surprising when Mike Allen did his BMR work uh what we would see with NDF total tract digestibility in sit or in the animal was often not all that different. Okay, so we did two studies.
(19:12) In study one, uh what we wanted to determine it, we wanted to determine if one of the three short short corns was superior. And in study two, uh we wanted to take that superior short hybrid and then compare it to the conventional. Okay. In study one, we had 40 Holene cows, 20 primoparis, 40 multiparis. Uh they were about 150 days in milk.
(19:37) uh producing 35 kilos of milk or about not quite 80 pounds per cow per day. Uh 670 kilos on average. That was the average of the permies and the multis. And I should say that before so these cows were later in lactation than we would have preferred. But um this was two years ago. We have 200 lactating cows in our herd at that time and I have to compete with Barry Bradford and Adam Lock for cows.
(20:07) I simply couldn't get the early lactation cows I wanted. What I did for this study was I fed them more forage NDF than I would typically feed the cows at 150 days in milk. And I did that because I wanted to try to make sure these cows were limited by gut fill. So when I put them on our our pre-diet, they actually took a hit in milk yield.
(20:31) I think milk yield dropped about four or five pounds when I put them on my diet. So before they were on uh at 35 kilos, they would have been about 37 uh kilos. They were blocked by parody. Uh treatments were assigned randomly within a block. And then we did an incomplete Latin square design of three periods of three weeks each and they were uh mostly balanced for carryover effects but not entirely because we had three periods.
(21:03) Milk and feed were measured daily. Body weight was measured three days uh at the beginning and end of each period. Condition scores were also measured. Then milk composition was analyzed for two days per week. all three milkings two days uh per week. Uh samples of all diet ingredients and TMRs were collected once daily and thenorts and feces were collected to do a digestibility study every 15 hours over the last five days of period two.
(21:34) Okay. So, our diets in study one were uh we fed uh a diet I'll just say that was I'm going to drop down here first. Forage NDF was about 24%. Okay. So, whenever you do a corn silage study or forage study, you have to decide do we do we feed all of our diets so that they have the same amount of corn silage or so that they have the same amount of corn silage NDF.
(22:04) and I chose to try to get the same amount of corn silage NDF. We weren't perfect at it because, you know, we had our samples before the study started and then we took samples during the study and afterwards and and based on what was actually fed during the study, we decided, you know, we weren't perfect. There was a bit more forage NDF in short one in BMR than there was in oops I see that this I'm sorry that last one is 23.7 not.
(22:33) 7 uh but uh we were close. So in these diets uh alalfa salad was 10% soybean meal about 14% soy halls about 5% corn grain uh about zero to 8% and then [clears throat] a protein vitamin supp mineral vitamin supplement about 12%. So I adjusted soy halls, corn grain [clears throat] and corn silage and soybean meal to try to try to to try to get NDF forge NDF crude protein and starch all as close together as I could.
(23:14) Weren't perfect, but we were close. You could, you know, I could point out that short one would have had more starch from a slower fermenting source because there was more dry corn in that diet than um corn silage corn. And again, I'm sorry, this number is 23.7, not 7. for [clears throat] statistics. Uh we did uh a model our model included diet parody days and milk was a a co-variant um and we looked at uh a number of uh interactions we did orthogonal contrast for our diet uh component of the study we wanted to look at. So BMR versus
(24:03) other hybrids, tall versus shorts, uh short one versus the average of short two and short three, and then short two versus short three. And we chose uh short one versus short two and three after the fact simply because we could see it had a different starch content and was different than short short two and short three.
(24:26) Um I don't feel like I uh am quite privy to give out the the actual hybrid numbers. Uh that's Bayer's information. Hopefully they will be willing to share them at some time. Uh this paper is published in the journal of dairy science communications. So JDS communications there's more information in there and actually we did different contrasts for the paper than I'm going to show you today.
(24:52) [clears throat] Okay. So for results, a lot of data on here. I chose to put everything on one slide so that uh you could kind of look through it as you want. Uh but uh and we could we could look at the whole thing, but I will take you through it uh step by step. So when it comes to intake, okay, uh BMR uh cows actually ate less, which was completely not what we expected.
(25:20) Okay. In fact, let me just handle BMR first. BM BMR did not behave the way we expected in this study. Um perhaps we didn't have the best BMR hybrid here. Uh dry matter intake was lower. The cows produced uh less uh energy corrected milk. They produced um yeah uh so they produced less. They were more feed efficient however. Okay.
(25:49) So they were they had greater feed efficiency consistent with their greater NDF digestibility. Why they didn't eat more I really don't understand. I I suppose I don't want to dwell on the comparison of BMR versus the others too much. I do want to look at tall versus shorts. Okay. So the tall was a decal hybrid and now we're looking at all stuff from Bayer.
(26:18) So, we had a conventional hybrid, only one. Okay. And all of these shorts, they were all grown in one plot. So, I realize there's criticisms you could make there, but the field was pretty consistent, about as consistent as you could be. So, when we look at intake, not much different. I'm going to look at tall versus the average of the shorts.
(26:41) However, short one ate more than the other two shorts. When we look at energy corrected milk in general, uh the shorts on average uh tended to produce more than the tall and short one produced more than short two or short three. Uh not a big difference in fat content. The shorts generally had a little lower fat.
(27:13) Perhaps that might be because the NDF was more digestible. Okay, I'm not sure. Maybe there was something different about the starch. I don't know. Um, protein content uh was not really different. Uh, a little bit higher for short one than short two or short three. feed efficiency. Uh not much difference between the talls and the short, but it was lower for short one than short two or short three.
(27:43) And not much difference in body weight gain or body condition score. Uh body weight actually would be the average of the period here, not just the ending body weight of a period. Uh, I guess I already showed total track nutrient digestibilities. I'll just point out some of this doesn't entirely make sense to me.
(28:10) Uh, but it's what we found. Okay. Organic matter digestibility was lower for BMR than tall. I have no idea why. Um, oh, I'm sorry. This is total track nutrient digestibility. I really can't explain that though. And then as I already mentioned, INDF digestibility wasn't really different between the groups. starch digestibility was slightly different, but frankly, if you're 98 versus 99%, I really don't care.
(28:36) Um, and this was all all the corn silage had kernel processor crude protein digestibility. There are some slight differences, too. Um, anyway, that's total tracked digestibility. And our conclusion, our summary from that study was BMR improved feed efficiency but decreased feed intake and milk production.
(28:58) Perhaps we didn't have the best BMR hybrid. Short hybrids increased intake on average and milk production, energy corrected milk relative to the tall corn, but did not alter feed efficiency. Short one had greater intake and milk production than short two and three, but lower feed efficiency. And then short two and three were similar.
(29:18) And we concluded that short one seemed to be the best based on dry matter yield. It had a higher yield than the other two and results of study one. So then we did a second study where we compared the conventional hybrid versus short one 40 holing cows again 20 primmaaris 20 multiparis. This time they were 76 days in milk at the start start of the study.
(29:46) uh producing on average 46 kilos of milk. That's the average of the primies and the multips. So the multips were closer to 50 at least 52. Uh block by parody diets randomly assigned within block. And this time we fed a common diet uh for two weeks as a preliminary period and then um all the cows were uh put on uh one diet for the following six weeks.
(30:15) Okay, so those four diets are going to vary in corn silage type and NDF content or starch content. Milk and feed were measured daily. Again, cows are measured milk three times per week, I'm sorry, three times per day. Uh diets were fed one time per day as a TMR and liitim at 110% of expected intake. uh body weight and condition scores were measured the the uh at the start of the study three and at six weeks.
(30:49) Milk composition analyzed two days per week. Uh all three milkings. Samples of all diets and TMRs were collected once weekly. And then we did do digestibility in this study too. And then we also measured methane using a green feed unit. Okay. Uh fixed effects in this study were hybrid starch level parody class multiparis versus premiparis and then the interactions random effects uh cow nest within block and hybrid block and fi fiber content and block nest within parody and dry matter intake at the start of the study and the
(31:29) pre-treatment uh covariant value for any particular variable were used as coariantss. And all the results you'll see are uh LS means adjusted for that for those coariantss. Okay, just a reminder this is the composition of the two silages we used uh and the tall and the short one were really pretty consistent.
(31:59) Okay, starch content 37 35% lignon content a little lower for short one. uh in vitro forage NDF digest NDF digestibility was a little higher for short one. Uh NDF content was about the same. And now we fed four diets. So we fed either a diet that was high starch 36% starch or I'm sorry that's corn silage or high.
(32:36) So high starch was where are we at? 32% starch versus low starch 23% starch. So the high starch diet for the shorts was 36% corn silage along with some alphaalfpha halage, corn grain, soybean meal, some cotton seed and protein mineral vitamin premix. very very similar for the tall high starch diet. Needed just a little bit more soy, a little less corn grain, a little more corn silage to try to get all the values below the same.
(33:11) And then the low starch diet, we used 56% corn silage, 14% halage. So we were pushing these cows uh for peak lactation. This diet had 24% forage NDF. Uh so it was a very high forage NDF low starch diet for cows in peak lactation especially uh in Michigan we would almost never well we would never feed this cow this diet to cows in uh peak lactation it's got way more forage so we're really pushing the diets to say okay would forage in DF digestibility potentially make a difference here are results and I'd like to especially highlight uh a few things
(33:52) here and those are the things in yellow. Okay. So, when we fed uh the short versus the tall on a high starch diet, intake was the same. But when we fed the low starch diet, when we really pushed the cows to say, "Okay, how much can you eat when we're feeding you lots of forage NDF?" The cows on the short corn silage ate more than those on the tall or conventional corn silage.
(34:21) And that was significant. And then of course on average cows uh consuming high starch ate more than cows consuming low starch. That was to be expected. That's normally what you see and that's why we typically feed high starch diets to cows in peak lactation. Then if we look at energy corrected milk [clears throat] here um feeding higher starch tended although tended I should be careful it's p equals.
(34:55) 3 tended to increase energy corrective milk it certainly increased total milk but it tended to or it actually significantly decreased milk fat percent while increasing total milk. So, feeding more starch tended, I'm going to use that word loosely here, to increase energy corrected milk, not a lot. Um, but hybrid did make a difference.
(35:24) So, feeding the short corn silages increased uh energy corrected milk compared to feeding the tall corn silages. That was true whether we fed high starch 45.2 2 versus 43.3 or low starch 44.1 versus 42.5. So this is in kilograms. If you want to think about pounds, that would be about 100 pounds and a difference of about four pounds.
(35:51) Okay, so uh got about 4% more milk from the cow, energy corrected milk from the cows when we fed the short corn versus the tall corn, recognizing they ate more, too. Um and I realize yeah feed efficiency is down here. Um no difference between hybrids. Um certainly feed efficiency was uh greater for the um low starch diets.
(36:27) Um and that's you know we measure body weight gain. This is looking at milk over over intake. Uh if we incorporated body weight gain into this and I tried to put in what I think happened to energy, the energetic efficiency wouldn't be much different between the high and low starch diets. Okay.
(36:49) So I think that's probably all I really want to point out here. So, uh, the the, uh, just to reiterate, the the short corn diets resulted in more milk production, energy corrected milk production than the tall corn diets, and that was true whether you fed high or low starch. Uh just quickly, we really didn't see much effect on methane uh from hybrids, but we did see what we expected uh that with higher starch, you get less methane per unit of intake.
(37:24) So, summary and conclusion from study two, as expected, high starch diets increased intake, milk yield, milk protein content, and yield, body weight gain, and body condition gain, but decreased milk fat content. uh the short hybrid increased intake, energy corrected milk yield and milk protein content and yield.
(37:42) There was no interaction between the hybrid and starch level and as expected high starch diets decreased methane hybrid had no effect. So our conclusion was that at least in this study the short one hybrid outperformed the tall control as a forage corn for cows in peak lactation. I did not try to do economics on this.
(38:05) I would point how out however that in this particular study the short corn had just as great of a yield in fact slightly higher than the tall corn silage. Uh and I recognize that this was you know one this was one year this was one field each was only one plot. Uh there was one bag of short corn, one one bag of tall corn.
(38:37) Uh you know, you could argue that that's not really replicated, but there is no way to do a good corn silage study. And I just say the perfect study for corn silage is just about impossible to to really do a corn silage study, right? Okay. You'd have to have small fl plots of each hybrid, each stored in a separate bag.
(38:58) Now, you'd have to be feeding five different bags of each hybrid uh every day. That means I got to make up a separate diet for each one of these. Maybe I'd feed each one of them to four cows. Um and then I'd have to decide, do I feed equal amounts of corn salad? Do I have equal forage NDF, equal starch? I I would have to feed just about 30 or 40 different diets uh if I really want to do a corn silage study correctly.
(39:26) And then I'd want to look at exactly what's going on with body weight gain. So I'd need to do this for a long time. It's impossible to do. I'd also point out that when you think about what does this mean for my farm? Well, this is not there's there's not a perfect in my opinion a perfect corn size for all farms.
(39:44) It it depends on what other feeds are available. Okay. Can you do you have plenty of land to grow all of your own corn grain or is land a limitation? Do you have other non do you have non-forage fiber sources available? Can you get cotton seeds or soy holes or beet pulp or corn gluten feed? Are those things you can get in pretty cheap? Because if they if they are if you can, well then maybe I'm going to worry less about fiber digestibility in my corn silage.
(40:13) I may I recently did a study where we fed 8% wheat straw and only 25% corn silage, no other forage in our diet. And then I fed a bunch of non-forage uh fiber sources and we got 52 kilos of milk from cows that the control group fed is the best diet I could feed and uh with lots of starch and digestible NDF uh forge NDF was 53 kilos.
(40:40) So I lost maybe two pounds of milk feeding other stuff not grown on the farm. Is minimizing offfarm feed costs a goal? Uh, is wind a concern? Uh, if if you're worried in Michigan, wind is not our top concern. It's not like I grew up in Iowa and and it can be windy, especially in the northwestern part. Okay.
(41:03) Then short corns might offer a real advantage. So, I would just point out that yeah, no silage is probably perfect for everything. I can I think I could deal with whatever corn silage you give me and I could get close to maximum milk from cows, but I would still love to feed digestible fiber to cows uh in early and and uh late lactation.
(41:26) Uh I still think uh forage corns that have more digestible fiber, especially if I want to grow as much stuff on my own farm as I can is an advantage. uh in our hands the short corn had higher forage NDF digestibility. I've seen other studies where the forage indigestibility was in vitro forage uh in vitro indf digestibility from the feed lab was greater than it was for conventional hybrids that were compared to it.
(41:59) But I know there's probably studies that show big differences in conventionals. So, uh, you know, I this is just what we found. Um, I'd also point out that I know that there are other hybrids. You know, really what's different about this short corn is it has more leaves per unit stock. Uh, you could probably cut higher.
(42:24) You could maybe find a forage corn that's got more leaves per stock, too. I don't know. But one of the big advantages of the short corn is it is uh it handles wind better and and uh if you can get as much yield as you can from conventional it seems like it's worth a try. So uh that would be my conclusion at least based on our study that I'm happy to take some questions.
(42:50) Well, thanks, Mike. And we we might have to have you back on to share your next study coming up in here shortly. But before we get started with the Q&A portion, we'd like to share a brief video and then we'll be right back to answer the questions submitted during today's presentation. [music] New research is changing everything we thought we knew about choline's impact on the cow and her calf.
(43:21) And top scientists have a lot to say about it. They are presenting new research that supports choline as a required nutrient to optimize milk production. Choline as a required nutrient to support a healthy transition. choline as a required nutrient to improve calf health and growth and choline as a required nutrient to increase colostrum quantity.
(43:44) This new research is solidifying choline's role as a required nutrient for essentially every cow, regardless of health status, milk production level, or body condition score. Learn more about the science that is changing the game and the choline source that is making it happen. Reassure Precision Release Choline from Balchem.
(44:05) Visit balm.com/scientists say to learn more. [music] As a reminder, you can still submit questions through the Q&A tab at the top of your screen. So Mike, we got a lot of questions coming in. So your first question is from Tashomi. What is the association between high NDF gas production and milk yield? [gasps] >> So I've never paid a lot of attention to gas yield. Okay.
(44:43) But I would imagine that uh you know if gas yield is some indication of of uh fiber digestibility that you know it's the same thing. So I I'm not an expert on gas yield. So, I really prefer not to even get into that one. Okay. But, >> okay, [laughter] >> we'll take that one. >> I see one question from Jim Aldridge that I'm looking at the Q&A or two that I wanted this quick answer because he asked what's 7 ECM and I should have said that.
(45:12) >> Um, you know, ECM energy corrected milk is something people have been >> doing for years and uh we use this equation that in my opinion makes no sense. uh years ago Lou Armano and I said why are we why don't we we calculate milk energy why don't we we talk about whether we're doing 4% fat corrected milk or three and a half% fat correct why don't we just say we're using we're assuming that the milk energy unit is that there's seven uh megal of energy per kilo of milk so I I just take my milk energy divided by 7
(45:50) that's 7 ecm Okay, >> I'll let you uh moderate. >> No, no, you're good. If you see another question come in that you definitely want to answer, jump right in. But I do have a question myself when I was listening to the study diets. So, you added quite a bit more uh dry corn to short one.
(46:15) Does that mean that it delivered less corn grain in the silage by quite a bit? All of the corn silages were 40% starch. >> Short one was only 35%. >> Okay. And you know, I chose it um because the fiber seemed more digestible. I recognize and I I should have showed this on the second study. I recognize that that that difference in starch might have contributed to the results um because we included a bunch of starch that would have been more slowly fermented.
(46:47) However, I just point out that for all of those studies, we were feeding more forage NDF than I would typically feed to cows at that point in time. So, I don't think that the starch fermentation rate in those uh in that in those diets probably was a big contributor to differences in uh in in uh what we found for results.
(47:10) And I'd point out in the second study um the difference in there were slight differences there too. >> But if you look at the effects on uh intake and milk the differences between hybrids the differences I added uh I had 23% starch I think in one diet and was it 32% starch in the other. The difference you saw with that massive difference in starch was was actually less I think than the difference we saw due to hybrid.
(47:39) So, I don't think that the I think there's something going on that is it's not you can't explain this based on starch content or starch fermentation profiles. >> Okay. Um Josh is asking, "How would you expect the results to look in early lactation versus mid? Any differences?" >> Uh by early lactation, I'm not sure what he means.
(48:03) So, if if you mean fresh, >> well, I for cows, I'm perfectly fine feeding conventional corn silage. fiber digestibility is not the important point there. I think Mike Ellen has shown quite nicely that that in fact we want to uh we don't want too much propriate hitting the liver right away in fresh cows but otherwise um I would say you know our our study started at 70 days I think at 40 days we'd see the same kind of results.
(48:31) Okay. Uh Josh is asking did you observe any differences by par in terms of dry matter intake or milk between tall or short? >> No parity by uh treatment interaction. So I did not even report that. So the yeah no par by treatment uh par by diet interactions at all. So premise acted just the same way as multip. >> Uh Darl is asking in the second study you only saw about 1.8 to 2.
(49:03) 4 4 pounds more energy corrected milk when feeding diets. About 9% higher in starch. A very large diet change. >> That was kilos. >> Okay. >> Not pounds. So about three, four pounds. I agree. >> Not as big as I would have expected. >> Yeah. >> Uh but one of the things that happens is uh did I put Let me just I'll look at my paper.
(49:29) [snorts] We did see uh more body weight gain from the high starch diets too. Okay. So uh and then the other thing I'd say is you know measuring body weight gain uh and that was significant but measuring body weight gain in six weeks still I mean we can do it and we and it was significant but I I suspect there might even been a bigger difference than than what we thought.
(49:59) um based on other work we've done. >> Okay. >> Uh did I answer the whole question there? >> Yeah, I think so. It says there are many published studies that show 5 to eight pounds more energy corrected milk from eating a couple grams of feed additive. How is that possible? >> Yeah.
(50:22) So what was my difference was uh yeah one point yeah about about two to three pounds more energy corrected milk which be fat same as fat corrected milk very similar when when you look at just milk okay we saw an extra three kilos with the tall hybrid so seven pounds of milk if you just look at milk not the energy correction Um, next question comes from Manfred and it says, "Excellent talk. Thank you.
(50:57) You planted about nine plants for per meter squared. Are the short hybrids more tolerant to planting at higher densities?" >> Uh, I can't answer that. I'm not an aronomist, so I really don't know. I see a question from Paul Dyke, too. He said, "Was the population of the short corn that was planted 38 34 30?" It was.
(51:18) They were all 35,000. >> So they were all planted the same 35,000 and we used the same silage in study two as in study one. >> Okay. >> I'm just looking at I think I said 35,000 on there, didn't we? >> Yeah, >> I know it was in your slides. [clears throat and cough] >> I think it was 35,000. And the slides are available to download in the handouts tab and they will be available for anyone that's still looking for them.
(51:52) They will be available when we put the video out as well. So >> I'm going to quick go back and look. Yeah, all of them are 35,000 plants per acre. Yep. >> I don't know what that is per meter squared. [laughter] >> Can't do that one in my head. Okay. >> Well, actually, wait a minute. 80,000 per hectare. So, what is that? Eight. I think that's eight per meter squared.
(52:23) I have no idea what would happen if it was more dense. Maybe somebody from Bayer's on here and they can answer that question. >> There you go. >> Somebody from Pioneer. I know a few of my friends from Pioneer were going to be on here. So, I suspect Bayer folks are too. So Alan is asking, "Were there any other particle size differences between the different corn silages that were fed?" In other words, did the short corn chop differently? >> Uh, I don't remember and I don't think so, but I don't remember anymore and I
(52:55) don't have that in front of me. >> Uh, let's see. Vatel is asking, "Is there an efficient way to test these hybrids on farm when making multiple piles is not possible?" Yeah, good question. So, you know, I I do think that the So, if I was going to try this, if I had a dairy and I wanted to try, so my conclusion really is, you know, I think the short corns are worth trying, but uh you'd want to find one that had good yield.
(53:29) I'd want to know what is the expected yield compared to tall. I'm willing to give up some on yield if if the uh if I can expect the in vitro digestibility forage indf digestibility to be greater. So I would I would take a sample uh even fresh would be better than nothing I suppose and and uh have it tested and see if there's any difference.
(53:53) Uh we did I think Paul Dyke just said did we do seven hour start to distability? I believe we did and I believe we saw uh no difference or pretty small difference. >> Okay. Um Allan is also asking do you think that chemical fiber digestibility alone accounts for the differences observed? >> I have no idea. Good question.
(54:17) I don't know if there's something else about fragility of uh you know the plant cell walls that might be important here. certainly could be, but I just don't know. You know, lignon was only a lignon was lower in the short corns than in the tall corn. Maybe that's because there were more leaves per unit stem.
(54:37) I don't know. Um I didn't try to assess that. Uh probably we should have, but I don't think like an aronomist or well I I Yeah, I probably should have done that and I didn't. Uh Jeff is asking is the high starch versus low starch in the high starch versus low starch trial? I believe you said that they were acclimated to the high starch diet before the start of the trial.
(55:04) Did the low starch cows go directly onto the low starch diet or was there a trend and was there a trend in response to the low starch diets over time? >> Okay, so what we did was all the cows were fed a diet that was 50/50 of everything. I'm sorry, 25 to one quarter of everything. So, we took a we took a blend of all four diets and that's what was fed for the for the preliminary period.
(55:31) So they would have gone from um a diet that was uh about 26% starch up to or 27% starch up to 32% starch. Uh and our 32% starch did have 17% forage NDF. Uh so that's a little lower than you would than you would sometimes feed. Uh so we probably pushed him a little bit on that. Uh which could be why uh we saw a drop in that's probably explains why we saw a drop in milk fat >> and why energy corrected milk wasn't increased perhaps as much as it might otherwise have been especially on the uh short hybrid.
(56:23) >> Paul has another question. had it been nice to have had an intermediate uh diet in there, you know, maybe something uh that would have been 19% forage NDF, 29% starch. >> Um Paul just had another question in here about any issues with chopping. Did you have any issues with the chopper plugging or anything like that with the short hybrids? >> Uh not to my I I didn't hear about any of that. Okay.
(56:56) So, uh, I would have I didn't specifically ask. I should have, uh, but I would have thought that I would have heard something. I did ride in the chopper while he was doing the short corn for a little while and certainly didn't plug while I was riding in it. Uh, uh, I know I've heard I've heard that some people say you got to cut the short hybrids, you know, closer to the ground.
(57:23) Um, we just did our our the folks chopping ours chopped it uh to my knowledge the way they chop all of our corn silage at MSU. For the past 10 years, we've grown mostly BMR for our dairy herd. We grow a little bit of conventional corn silage for cows for fresh cows and dry cows, but we've done mostly BMR.
(57:47) And so we chop it the same way we chop that. Now, I know you said you didn't do much from an economics standpoint, but your gut, what would you say as far as the the economics of feeding a short versus a BMR versus a tall? >> Well, in our study, it would have been I think probably positive. Okay. So, uh we had more tonnage from the short that we used in the second study than we did from the tall.
(58:20) And uh the fiber was more digestible. The cows produced more. Um they did uh eat a little bit more, but you know, feed is pretty cheap compared to the value of milk. So especially when milk production is high, uh I I think uh the economics would have been good for the short in our case. Unless of course I had to pay way more for the seed.
(58:46) Perhaps that would have been another thing that would start to even them out, but that's my gut. But, you know, I haven't penciled it out. >> Yep. Well, and we have reached the top of the hour. So, I'll end it here and say thank you, Mike, and thank you everyone for attending today's webinar. If you do have additional questions, please submit them to an&h.marketingbal.com.
(59:11) Thanks for listening and uh I hope I didn't make any of my Bayer Pioneer friends too unhappy with me. [laughter] I'm just trying to tell you what we saw in this particular case and it seemed like it was a good choice. So, >> excellent. Excellent. Um well, the real science lecture series will continue with educa educational topics each month, including our next two.
(59:35) On November 18th, join Balcomm Scott Serell and Walt Culie from Progressive Dairy Publications as we chat with dairy producer Greg Nye of Mountain View Dairy on the next real producer exchange. And on December 2nd, we'll have a global dairy market status and 2035 perspectives webinar with Philip Getats of IFCN Dairy.
(59:56) Visit balm.com/realscience for details on other future webinars and to register for these upcoming events. Balm's podcast series continues to offer a deeper dive into our webinar topics. Log on to your favorite podcast platform and search for Real Science Exchange or visit balm.com/mpodcast. If you want a cool Real Science Exchange t-shirt, just subscribe to the Real Science Exchange and send us a screenshot along with your address to an&h.marketingbalm.
(1:00:24) com and we'll get that right off to you. On behalf of Balm and Dr. Vandar, thank you for joining us today. Bye-bye.