Understanding How Nutrition Modulates Immune Responses and Disease in Dairy Cattle - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n2qsDTcSB5E

Transcript:
(00:08) At Balm Animal Nutrition and Health, we strive every day to deliver results you can see in your animals productivity and your bottom line. From a smooth transition into the milking string for your fresh cows to a happy welcome home from your furry friend. From a strong start in your poultry flock to consistent weight gains for your finishing hogs, we expect to earn your business and your trust with our people, our products, and our science.
(00:40) Our people have an intense passion for your animals and your success. You can count on us for honest, candid advice and practical solutions for your toughest challenges. As the global leader in choline production, keelation and encapsulation technology, we take our obligation to you and to the environment seriously.
(01:03) Our products are backed by the most extensive and thorough research portfolio while our business is committed to advancing environmental sustainability and animal welfare. In the end, it all comes down to results. Balm delivers real results you can count on. results that exceed your expectations and results that bring true value to your bottom line.
(01:29) Leading the charge to meet the nutritional needs of ruminants, monogastrics and companion animals, Balm offers a growing portfolio of nutritional products and a dedication to innovation and industry sustainability. Balm is here to solve today and shape tomorrow. At Balm Animal Nutrition and Health, we strive every day to deliver results you can see in your animals productivity and your bottom line.
(02:14) From a smooth transition into the milking string for your fresh cows to a happy welcome home from your furry friend. From a strong start in your poultry flock to consistent weight gains for your finishing hogs. We expect to earn your business and your trust with our people, our products, and our science. Our people have an intense passion for your animals and your success.
(02:46) Hello everyone and welcome to the real science lecture series. My name is Scott Serell, director of global marketing for Balkim. Today we welcome Dr. Mike Belaloo of Texas Tech University to explore how nutrition modulates immune responses and disease in dairy cattle. As antibiotic use in livestock faces increased scrutiny, nutrition is playing an important role in supporting health and performance in dairy cattle.
(03:11) This webinar will look at how specific neutrutical strategies can support gut health, strengthen immune function, and reduce the impact of pathogens and feed toxins. I'd now like to introduce Dr. Mike Belaloo. Mike is a professor at the depart and the department chair of veterinary sciences in the uh Davis College of Agricultural Sciences and Nut and Natural Resources at Texas Tech University.
(03:38) His research focuses on how nutrition and management practices impact the health and performance of calves, heers, and transition cows. Michael enter earned his PhD in nutritional immunology from the University of California, Davis, and he's authored uh or co-authored more than a 100 peer-reviewed scientific publications and has given over 125 invited presentations.
(04:04) In addition to his academic role, Mike is the co-owner of MB Nutritional Sciences, a nutrition solution company based in Leach, Texas, as well. He has uh two calf rearing facilities located in New Mexico and Indiana. Dr. Blue, uh it's my pleasure to welcome you to the real science lecture series. Uh you're you're quite popular.
(04:26) We've got nearly 600 people registered for today's webinar. So, uh I'll turn it over to you now. >> Thanks, Scott. uh and thank you for for everybody joining uh this morning. Um I want to talk today about u you know how nutrition can modulate immune responses and disease. And this is kind of a broad topic and and when I was thinking about how I would approach this talk I mean I could give a a class on this topic.
(04:51) Um and actually we do um so what could I cover in 45 minutes and so again I I hope um I cover some information that uh is useful to the group. Um, but what what I want to do is is kind of give just a a brief introduction. I want to talk a little bit about immune dysfunction in dairy cattle. Um, and I'll use an example both in in the dairy calf as well as the the transition cow.
(05:16) Um, and and kind of understand, you know, what what specifically is going on with the immune system that is increasing the risk for disease. And then I want to spend most of our time uh talking about how nutrition can actually modulate immunity or or reduce the the incidence of disease. And I had to pick a few different general topics.
(05:36) And and one of the uh strategies we'll look at is how we can reduce pathogen loads uh primarily in the the gastrointestinal tract. And then I also want to talk a little bit and show some examples of how uh specific nutrients can can maybe modulate specific immune responses and and thereby uh reduce disease incidents.
(05:57) And then I want to spend the the last few minutes um talking about some practical applications. So I'll give an example uh in in a dairy calf and I'll also give an example in you know a transition cow or a calf that's been moved out of the the Hutch and into weaning pins. And so again, you know, I've been I've been studying animal disease for almost 25 years now, and it continues to negatively impact the dairy industry.
(06:24) Um, you know, gastrointestinal disease and respiratory disease in young animals. Um, mastitis and meritis are are two common uh diseases that we see in transition cows and it continues to to plague uh not only the the bottom line of the dairy producers, but also having negative impacts on the the animal as well. Um and when you look at actually what's causing disease, you know, we do have some pathogenic u some nasty pathogens uh that that can play a role in in causing these these diseases.
(06:52) But also we have a lot of environmental um or commensal or or you know these these bacteria or or pathogens um are in the environment or actually part of the the normal mucosa um and only cause disease uh when you know they're opportunistic. So, so something's happen to the immune system that it it doesn't allow it to control those and you can actually then cause disease.
(07:18) And so, you know, these environmental opportunistic infect uh infections really tell us a lot about the immune system because you only get disease from these when when something's gone wrong with with the immune system. And so our work in in calves and and transition cows and a lot of my work has been in calves but we've done some work with transition cows and it it really has helped contribute to this uh this shift in the way we think about the immune system from a you know generalized immunosuppression and it used to drive me crazy when people would
(07:48) say the immune system is suppressed the immune system is suppressed um you know and I I would show people I was like well some of the the aspects of the immune system are actually overstimulated um and that's probably contributing to to why these animals are at a higher risk for disease. And so we've really kind of changed from a generalized immunosuppression to this this concept of immune dysfunction.
(08:11) Um where some aspects of the immune system, you know, whether or not like in a transition cow, you know, reduced neutrfll responses. However, when you couple a reduced neutrfil response with an overzealous inflammatory response, that is actually what results in this um really high incidence of clinical disease and and a lot of potential tissue damage and and long-term uh tissue damage that can that can reduce or reduce the productivity of that animal.
(08:43) And so, this this concept of immune dysfunction will kind of continue to discuss throughout the day and it'll it'll come up. But um again I want to get away from the concept of just generalized immunosuppression to this concept of of immune dysfunction. Um when you look at the immune system and and I've always like to show this data um you know a breakdown in any component of the immune system can have one of two effects.
(09:05) It can either increase the risk of disease or it absolutely has no effect at all. Um, and so I like to show this data from a mouse model of mastitis. And they they challenged these mice with an intermeary E.coli challenge. And they either chemically depleted the the mice uh of the macrofase. So one of the the immune cells immune cells that lives in tissues.
(09:33) And when they they depleted the animals of the macrofasages, these mice and inter in intermarly infused them with ecoli there was no effect on sematic cell count recruitment. And there sorry sematic cells recruited to to the mamary gland just fine and it controlled the ecoli and those animals recovered without really much clinical signs of disease.
(09:54) And so there was enough redundancy. There's a lot of redundancy in the immune system. So removing the macrofase in this instance and in this model did not result in those animals developing mastitis. However, same animal model just now chemically depleting the neutrfil population and leaving the macrofase population intact.
(10:13) So just removing a different type of immune cell. And when they did that and challenged those those mice, what they saw was obviously reduced sematic cell count um because the the primary sematic cell counts in in a infected gland are going to be neutrfil. So you've depleted them out of blood. So now they can no longer be recruited to the mammary gland.
(10:33) And then what happened was there was uncontrolled ecoli growth in the in the mammary gland and those mice developed sepsis and there was a high incidence of mortality. So again this I I like this illustration because it shows that you know in this in this model removing the macrofase had no effect on on mastitis development.
(10:51) However depleting neutrfils or or interfering with neutrfll function really had dramatic effects on increasing the risk for severe mastitis and and increasing mortality. And this kind of parallel parallels really well with what we know about how neutrfils are involved in u the resistance to to mastitis in a lactating or in a early lactating dairy cow as well.
(11:16) Um the other thing is is cattle and animals including ourselves are constantly exposed to to potential pathogens in the environment. Um, again, we have a lot of potential pathogens in our upper respiratory tract that aren't causing disease in in a normal competent immune system. Um, so in an animal that where their immune system is functioning optimally or functioning well, they're able to kind of control and keep these potential pathogens at bay without causing any disease.
(11:48) And it's actually relatively inexpensive from a nutritional standpoint to to maintain that immune response and and and keep those uh potential pathogens at bay. However, there are situations, for example, environmental uh well, here's an example of of a situation where uh a competent immune system is able to keep uh an environmental cola form that so these animals say they're in a a freestall and they're on a manure bedding and so and let's just say it's in the summer and so you've got soers so that the manu the bedding is a little
(12:23) bit wet. So, there's just a little bit higher environmental colifform pressure. uh on the these animals. However, animals after peak lactation, their immune system as a whole is operating at a level that is able to keep that those colaforms at bay and you really don't develop a lot of inflammation. Um however, if those uh same environmental pressure from those colaforms in early to to uh before peak lactation, you're going to see an increased risk um of disease.
(12:56) And that's primarily going to be driven by a breakdown in a few different aspects of the the immune system. One of them being more of a suppressed neutrfil response and another being an exacerbated inflammatory response. Another example um you know we we've done a lot of disease challenge and I'll show some data on disease challenges in in calves but um in one of our models that that we've done ecoli challenges with we know that if the calf's greater than two weeks of age and I go in with a specific dose of E.
(13:24) coli coli I'm going to get very minimal clinical signs of disease you know looking at scour dehydration fever however if I challenge that calf at three days of life or seven days of life with the same dose and the same ecoli we're going to see uh dramatic uh scour those calfs are going to become dehydrated lethargic um and so again something's changed and we we have a pretty good idea of what's changed in that calf in the in the first few weeks of life that has now uh reduced the the incidence of disease and the severity of disease. So let's
(13:57) just look a little bit more at what this immune dysfunction looks like in both a transition cow uh and a calf for example. So um you know we know that transition cows have impaired neutrfll responses and this has been proven for for many many decades um and it's been proven by a lot of different lab groups throughout the world and it's a pretty consistent response that we see is that we see this impaired neutrfll response um and when you couple that with an exacerbated inflammatory potential so these these animals can produce more
(14:32) inflammation and when you think of inflammation you're you got to be thinking you know potential for uh collateral tissue damage also. So when you when you uncouple these two responses so you suppress neutrfil response but these animals can produce a lot of inflammation it really sets the stage for for a lot of uh damage uh to the the the mamary gland.
(14:58) Um calves also um you know when you look at what's kind of um deficient in their immune system early in life um typically you're going to see impaired physical barriers and that's primarily going to be in the GI tract. Um and when you couple that with the potential that you may or may not have low serum antibodies depending on the colostrum status um of the calf.
(15:18) And then when you couple that again like what we saw with the transition cow is that these calves have a very intact inflammatory potential. Um this really sets the stage that these animals can produce a lot of inflammation. Um so when you when you have these two things put together like a suppressed some suppressed uh immune system and you couple it with an intact or overaggressive inflammatory potential.
(15:42) It really can set the stage uh for a severe disease um in these animals. So, one of the things I I do want to talk about and I'll I'll show some data throughout the presentation on this is, you know, what does a good immune system look like? If you if you've seen me give a talk before, um I I usually I typically show data like this.
(16:04) Um but we did a study um 75 close-up cows enrolled at seven days before expected data parturation. And specifically we were looking at at a few different lucasite responses but one of the main populations we were looking at were neutrfll. And so we looked at some adhesion molecules and some oxidative burst uh relative to cving.
(16:23) So we took blood samples at minus 7 minus 3 7 days and 28 days uh relative to to parterition and we looked at some health outcomes. So clinical mastitis, we did some vaginal discharge, uh scoring, uh pregnancy at 150 days in milk. And the data that I'll show today is is we we classified animals as they were either cold less than 28 days of milk or uh cows that got cold greater than 28 days of milk.
(16:53) And I'll just show this uh one slide here. So this is just looking at one measure of of neutrfil uh function, let's say. and it's measuring L select in the adhesion molecule on the surface of of the the neutrfil. And so again on the the x- axis it's time relative to cving or days relative to cving. So parturation is here in the vertical line.
(17:13) And what we've did is we've classified um the three different groups. So animals that that were not cold during that lactation, animals that were cold less than 28 days in milk in that lactation and animals that were cold greater than 28 days in milk. And then we looked at their L selectant expression um during this transition period.
(17:33) And so the the first thing I'll look at is the the group that was not cold. So it's this small dash line. So partition so at seven days in milk you can see the the animals that were not cold had elevated L selectin expression and then by 28 days uh in milk they were back down to basically kind of prepartum levels of that um expression intensity.
(17:53) uh the animals that were cold less than 28 days of milk. Again, prepartum really not there really were no differences there. But again, at seven days of milk, you can see a separation. And so these these cows that were cold less than 28 days in milk, their L select expression was lower um than the the other two groups.
(18:13) Um and obviously there was no 28 day measurement on these animals because they died sometime between 7 days in milk and 28 days in milk. Um the other group was these animals that were cold greater than 28 days in milk. So again you can see at seven days they weren't different than the the group that got that were not cold but what you see is out here at 28 days of milk their el selectin expression is still elevated.
(18:36) And so again, um, you know, looking at this is there's some continued inflammation or continued pressure that that's placed on these animal that these animals are almost more of a developing some type of chronic inflammation. And so, you know, when I look at what a good immune response looks like, you know, there's going to be a rapid upregulation when needed.
(19:00) Uh, so, um, you know, the the analogy I typically use is if I see somebody in my backyard trying to steal my barbecue, you know, I make a phone call to the the Love Police Department, I want them to get there quickly, right? So, I want the the a rapid up regulation when needed and I want the response to be proportional to the threat.
(19:17) So, again, I'm I'm I may be calling Love Police Department. I'm not calling Canon Air Force Base to fly a drone over my house and and drop a bomb on my house to to to neutralize the threat. Um because again that that response is disproportional to the threat. Okay, it's just a barbecue. Um you know, and the problem with if you have too much of a response, you you can get a lot of collateral tissue damage uh taking place.
(19:43) So again, you want to minimize uh collateral damage and then you want to rapid downregulate the threat. Um and so when you look at the the previous slide, you know, it it could be where those cows that were um cold less than 28 days of milk, you know, at that seven days of milk, their their neutrfil response was was less.
(20:03) Um and when you looked at those cows that were were cold greater than 28 days of milk, you know, their neutrfll response was still elevated at 28 days in milk. Okay, we didn't get a rapid down regulation potentially once the threat was removed or or something happened where it initiated some type of chronic uh inflammation or chronic infection there.
(20:24) And so again, this is typically when when I'm looking at what a good immune response looks like. And I'll show some data uh actually in some pigs uh in a few minutes that shows something very similar to this where um you know there's just kind of a good immune response is the response like white blood cell counts go up and then they go back down.
(20:43) Um they don't go up and stay up. Um that also is not a a good response. So now looking at how nutrition can influence immunity, there's there's a lot of different strategies um and I could pick any one of these and and spend an entire lecture just talking about um you know the impact of like substrate supply. So again we know the immune system requires nutrients. Okay.
(21:09) So it requires uh carbohydrates, it requires glucose. The immune system loves to use glucose as an energy source. It also requires uh amino acids for example to to synthesize various proteins that are involved in in host defense. um various minerals uh whether or not it's an antioxidant or um I could show you data and and there's been quite a bit of data like on neutrfll uh that calcium for example is is required for optimal neutrfll function and a deficiency or you know even subcl clinically hypocalcemic cals in early lactation you know there's a
(21:43) suppression at least some of the suppression that we see in neutrfil response potentially could be driven by that there's just not enough calcium available uh inside those those neutrfils for it to optimize to work optimally. Um, we're not going to focus a lot on on this aspect of how nutrition can influence immunity today.
(22:01) Um, what we're going to do is spend more and we're also not going to spend uh a lot of time talking about recovery and resolution. Um, so part of the disease process is once the threat has been resolved, how do we get back to homeostasis? How do we repair that tissue? How do we repair that mammary gland? How do we repair um the the lungs to where they're they're going to be a productive tissue again? Um so initiating tissue repair and and resolution pathways and again antioxidants again from a nutritional standpoint play a key role in in this
(22:34) recovery and resolution. Um where I chose to to focus most of our conversation today is uh initially um we'll talk about pathogen reduction and we're going to focus mostly on the GI tract. Um, you know, nutrition is an attractive approach to to uh influence gastrointestinal disease because you can supply things directly to where the problem is occurring.
(23:01) And so um so we can talk about uh strategies to improve gut integrity. Uh one of the main things I'll I'll focus on is is pathogen binding. Um but I'll also show a little bit of data on some in you know feeding some direct fed microbials or influencing that the microbiome of those animals uh to improve uh barrier and and reduce uh exposure to various pathogens.
(23:24) And then we'll pivot and we'll talk about some imunological modification. Um and so specifically looking at strategies to where you know for example and the model we'll use is suppressed neutrfil response. Um, is there a strategy where we can supplement something or feed something that is going to stimulate or uh recover some of that that suppressed um neutrfil response um and and specifically looking at there there's a lot of different immune cell uh targets we could look at um and and so we'll just highlight a few
(23:56) of those but I first want to talk about uh pathogen reduction and then we'll talk about imological um modification. So, uh, a lot of the work I'll show you, um, over the next few slides was was done by a grad student of mine, Emily Davis, and she actually worked a lot with this ceramic particle. So, this is a 40 micron electro micro microraph of a ceramic particle.
(24:21) Um, and she actually during her work was she was doing a lot of work with salmonella and trying to reduce salmonella uh in calves. and she in her work she said you know there's a lot of ceramics involved um in water filtration and air filtration and they they do a lot with gram negative bacteria. So she's like you know would you be interested in looking at some of this the the ceramic technologies at at reducing uh salmonella.
(24:48) So she took some salmonella incubated it. Um so again this is kind of a a zoomed in um these little two micronsiz rods are basically salmonella attached to the surface. Um so she incubated the the ceramic particles with with some salmonella washed them and then then imaged them to show that the salmonella was binding to the surface and into these these pores uh within the the ceramic particle.
(25:13) And then she plugged this into her um her filtration model. Um and really what the way this data looks at CFU reductions, so log base 10. Um so what she would do is she would put a million colony forming units of either Salmonella typhium, salmonella dublin or ecoli and she would pass it through this and she would look at the reduction.
(25:37) So how much actually made it through and how much stayed. So the the reduction like a one log reduction would go from 1 million down to 100,000. So like for this ecoli that ceramic particle you know it started with 1 million uh ecoli per mill and then after it went through the filter with that was packed with the ceramic particle.
(26:00) Uh there was only 100,000 remaining. So 900,000 were removed or retained on the ceramic particle. So she used activated carbon as a positive control and a couple other commercial clays um as some other negative controls or comparative. And basically what she had shown was that the the ceramics are pretty effective and almost equally effective as activated carbon at removing uh the gram negative bacteria uh from uh the the solution.
(26:30) Um and again the the clays and the bentonites were somewhat effective but but to a lesser degree than the ceramic and and the activated charcoal. So then she moved this uh into an animal and one of the things here I'll just kind of set the stage. So this is an ilial loation study. So this is a sevenweek old holing bull calf here uh down here.
(26:51) Um, and we did a midline incision. And then basically we pull out the intestines and tie off little one-inch sections of the the elium. Um, and we can get about 18 uh sections in the elium before we start hitting the jigunum. Um, but what we would do then is into various sections you inject either for example salmonella and in this study it was determined that we had given 18 billion salmonella into this little one-inch loop.
(27:20) Um and then so three loops per calf and then there's replicated calves but um you know three loops per calf would get the the 18 billion salmonella by itself. Uh three loops will get sterile saline and that's going to be kind of our negative control and then three loops would get uh the the salmonella with or without the the ceramic particle.
(27:42) Um so does adding the ceramic particle with the salmonella reduce the the damage to the intestines? Um we also so we did it with salmonella and then we also did uh this looking specifically at endotoxin so purified endotoxin in in the intestines too. Uh so we had some evidence that uh the ceramics can also bind endotoxin. So we wanted to specifically look at endotoxin uh tissue damage as well.
(28:06) So after we've injected everything, then we tuck them back into the calf and and it was determined that we basically needed to leave the the toxins in the intestines for about four hours for exactly four hours um before we harvested the animal and took the tissues out um and looked at how much damage was actually done.
(28:23) So it took about four hours for either the salmonella or the endotoxin to cause sufficient tissue damage that we could quantify. And so looking at the the data here. So uh I'll just show two pieces of data. So this is the data with Salmonella. Uh so uh we use a a slide scanner. So we can take really nice pictures of the um high resolution pictures of the the tissue and then a pathologist can go in and then count in this case on a 40x field they counted how many neutrfils they would see.
(28:54) So again, you don't see a lot of neutrfils in in the intestines because they they can potentially cause a lot of damage uh to the intestines because they're kind of like kamicazis. They go to a site of infection and and they're effective at at controlling disease, but they also cause some collateral damage.
(29:09) So you don't typically see a lot of neutrfils in a healthy tissue. So the the sterile saline control um on average they were seeing about two neutrfils. Um and then the salmonella infused ones, it was up, you know, in between eight and nine or eight and 10. So let's just say closer to to to nine neutrfils.
(29:27) So we got an influx of neutrfils into the tissue. And then when we infuse infused uh the salmonella with the ceramic, it basically reduced it back down to not different than than the sterile saline. And then the other thing we typically will look at, we look at a lot of different things, but um are the villi length.
(29:47) And so again, the sterile saline about 550 micrometers. And a pretty common marker is you start seeing villi blunting uh when tissues get damaged. So again uh they're trying to decrease their surface area. There's tissue damage there. So like the salmonella we saw blunting and then when we infused the the salmonella with the ceramic it basically prevented that that blunting in the tissue.
(30:11) Similar response to the endotoxin. I will note that we had to infuse a lot of endotoxin to to get inflammation uh in the intestines. Um and so again a similar response uh in this case it was just the challenge and we did see uh that we when we infused endotoxin with the ceramic particle we did reduce a lot of that inflammation um in terms of the the neutrfil response.
(30:36) Similar when we added in uh high doses of endotoxin we we saw blunting and then when we infused um the the ceramic with the endotoxin we prevented that blunting. So then we moved this into a live animal and I know this is a a dairy talk but um we had the opportunity to to do this study in a in a wean pig model and we did and so we looked at feeding the the ceramic particle.
(31:04) So we fed the ceramic particle at one pound per 10 or 5 pounds per 10 in the wean pig diet. Uh we weaned these pigs, moved them from Texas Tech to the USDA facility in LVC and then challenged them seven days post-w weaning uh with uh about 20 million salmonella and terica. And so this is average daily gain. So we did have an uninfected control group that wasn't fed any of the ceramic and we did not challenge them with salmonella.
(31:29) And so you can see their average daily gain was just under 0.9 pounds per day. Um the infected control had decreased average daily gain. So, we we blunted their growth. And if you looked, if I overlaid feed intake or dry matter intake, that's primarily what's what's driving this. These infected control caps did not eat as much um pig starter.
(31:50) Um and then when we uh fed the exact same starter, but added one pound per tennis ceramic, we almost completely prevented the the decrease in average daily gain. And then when we fed it at five pounds per 10, uh we actually saw a little bit of a numerical increase in in average daily gain in those uh infected pigs that were supplemented with the ceramic particle.
(32:10) Looking at white blood cell counts, um this is kind of illustrating again what I I think a good immune response is. So we challenge these calves here or sorry these pigs here at seven days and what a good response is going to be. And so this is looking at neutrfll count. You know, you want it want it to go up and then you want it to come back down, right? And so our uninfected controller is this this gray bar here.
(32:33) So you can see we see a little bit of an increase over the first 14 days. That could be you know they they moved environments um they went from from a nursery at the Texas Tech farm over to the USDA facility. So this could just be um some but what what you see is a leveling off. So this is the uninfected control and then the infected control again at seven days they were challenged here in Sue you see a rapid increase in their neutrfil response in blood or their white blood cell counts and again at 14 days it continues to go up and it it
(33:02) goes up a little bit over the next uh you know at 21 days. Um but the the bigger point here is that it's still elevated relative to the the uninfected control here um you know 14 days after the the the challenge. And so the the two groups that were supplemented with the ceramic, what we see is that they go up and then they come back down to not different than the the uninfected control.
(33:28) So again, um a better immune response in the fact that they're responding uh but then coming back down uh resolving it to to not different than the the uninfected control. So again, much better immune response to that salmonella respond to that salmonella infection uh when they were supplemented with the ceramic particle. The last thing on on binding um you know just looking at some micotoxin actually a lot of the work with with ceramics um in the late 90s uh was done specifically looking at at micotoxin.
(33:58) So we we also did look at that as well and so we included a couple um different uh commercial clays. One I would call a modified clay and the other one just kind of a a a bent knight clay. um and then compared it to to the the ceramic particle. And we looked at an array of four different micotoxins from aphletoxin, fumonosin, uh OTAA, and then zoralenone.
(34:22) And we ran these at really low binder to toxin ratios. Um and so, you know, looking at aphletoxin, you know, clays and and modified clays are going to bind aphletoxin typically fairly well. Um so we see some absorption about 17% in this model. Again, we're running this under suboptimal conditions, but what you can see is the ceramic particle binds a lot more.
(34:45) Um, looking at fumosin and OTAA, really the clay and the modified clay in this model didn't touch it where we see the the ceramic particle binding uh significantly more um fumos and otaa relative to to the other two. And then zoralenone. Ceramics have been known to bind xylenone very well. It's a hydrophobic miccotoxin. Uh this was actually some of our our thought process of of why we thought uh ceramics might bind endotoxin because of the the lipid a fraction of the the endotoxin uh is hydrophobic and that's kind of what induces inflammation. And so again, you
(35:20) know, the the clay and modified clay didn't really absorb uh too much of the the zeralenone, but the the ceramic did a did a good job. And so when you look at like percent of toxin absorbed and the binder to toxin ratio where you can put this is you know how much of a binder you potentially have to feed to get equal amounts of a toxin.
(35:40) You know we can feed much lower levels or supplement much lower take less room in the diet by feeding a ceramic versus um you know a standard clay kind of uh binder. We also know that um you know various yeast cell wall extracts or you know these biological modifying polysaccharides um so when you look at a yeast cell wall really there there's two major polysaccharides that we're interested in they're going to be the manin fractions the the algosaccharides associated with the manin protein and then also the the beta glucans and so we had come across
(36:14) this study you know over a decade ago and where they had looked at trying to quantify how much binding to ecoli and salmonella various yeast derivatives could do. And in their paper they showed that the man in fraction was associated with the ability to bind ecoli. And a lot of us have probably seen those uh hemogluten assays where when you incubate a yeast cell wall extract with a a group of act ecoli or salmonella you'll start seeing kind of it it clumping because it's binding.
(36:48) The other thing that they did notice and I I never said anything but they concluded in their paper that uh the betalucan fraction was related to the salmonella binding and if you look at their data they just actually interpreted it wrong. It actually the the man infractions were associated with both the ability to bind ecoli and salmonella.
(37:08) So I make that point because we took their assay and basically uh optimized it in our lab to to look at it. And so let's just we looked at E.coli binding uh salmonella typhaman binding and a delin binding. Let's just look at one of these. Let's just look at the ecoli binding. And so it's like cfus per milligram of of whatever we put into the plate.
(37:31) So BSA is kind of a negative control. It's just a large it's albumin. So it's just coating this this sticky plate. Um and it really shouldn't bind much much ecoli. We also did run a blank. Again this is kind of a sticky plate. So you can see its binding goes up um because you just get some when we add the E.coli there just if I didn't put something in place of it some of that E.
(37:52) coli coli is just going to bind to the plate directly. But I did buy a purified betaglucan from from Sigma and plated that on there. And again, basically you see that betalucans really do not bind E.coli. And again, betalucan glucans don't bind salmonella. There is a function to betalucans and we'll talk about them uh here in a little bit, but they they really have no binding uh capability.
(38:14) And then we looked at five different extracts um that have various manin contents um and and processing and how the the extracts been been been processed. But what you see generally is that the manin oligosaccharide fractions are binding E.coli and they're binding Salmonell and they're binding Salmonella Dublin.
(38:34) And we've put these into our iloligation model and seen pretty effective decreases in in tissue damage to to salmonella uh when we infuse some of these these maninoligosaccharide fractions um in there as well. So again you know from a from a binding standpoint the ceramic particles uh activated carbons um the manoligosaccharides can all have effectiveness at at reducing the the pathogen load that these animals are being exposed to.
(39:03) uh in the digestive tract. One of the other things um that you'll see is um this is this is a nice figure showing kind of the the gastrointestinal immune system and the the epithelial barrier here. And I just want to briefly show you a little bit of work that we did with some direct fed microbials. So again, you know, animals are constantly being exposed to to pathogens.
(39:23) I always joke with calves, if they would just lick less, they'd be less likely to get second. I might just don't lick that. And whenever we do disease challenges in our barns, I always tell the students, don't lick anything in in the barn because you're going to be more likely to get salmonella. Uh even when we just do uh studies at our our Texas Tech calf facility, I always tell students, don't lick stuff because you're going to get crypto if you do.
(39:45) Um but again, we have we have potential pathogens constantly in in the the digestive tract. And these commensal bacteria are not only competing uh for nutrients, but they're also uh metabolizing and and producing, you know, various metabolites, one of them being like short- chain fatty acids that are are influencing barrier function.
(40:06) And so what I want to show you is is a study that that we did where we fed a blend of of probiotic bacteria. Um and we've done this with a couple different blends of of probiotic bacteria. Uh but again, we challenged them with our Salmonella model at seven days of life. And so we had three different groups. We had a control group that was just fed milk replacer.
(40:23) Uh we did not challenge those calves with salmonella. Um we fed a group control that was challenged with salmonella. And so again, this is looking at the villi to ratio. So again, we're seeing blunting uh tissue damage in the douadnum uh when we challenged those calves with salmonella. So again, this was about two weeks after we we harvested these calves two weeks after the challenge.
(40:44) So we challenged them at seven days of life and then harvested them at 21 days of life. So we again see uh blunting in the datadum of those calves but the calves that we supplemented the probiotic blend with and challenged with salmonella had the same villi to crypt ratio. So we didn't see any villi blunting. The interesting thing when we looked at the elium of these calves is we didn't see that blunting by the control with salmonella relative to just the control group by itself.
(41:12) But the interesting thing is we did see that the the probiotic supplemented calves had greater dramatically greater vilit uh ratios. So you know are is the the probiotic or that blend in this specific study was there some benefit to to intestinal health um of those calves and then this was just looking at mezzantic lymph node colonization.
(41:33) So again our our negative control none of the lymph nodes in the intestines had salmonella present. um about 43% of the calves had a lymph node uh that tested positive for the salmonella we challenged with uh in the control group and then it was reduced to about 14% of the the probiotic supplemented calves um so you know kind of pivoting a little bit um so from from pathogen reduction and GI tract you know like I said earlier the the link between uh nutrition and GI eye health is very direct you know you you are supplying things that are
(42:11) directly going to the GI tract so you can can you know directly influence that so what about you know what's the link between nutrition and improving immunity in tissues that are not part of the GI tract okay so we know that various things that we that we supplement are going to influence the the GI tract we know about 70% of the the immune tissues or immune cells lie within the GI tract so there's some direct relationship between what we're supplying there and then the the influence on the these immune cells. One
(42:44) of the things I'll show you in a little bit is there's certain nutrients that also get absorbed into the body that can also then go have systemic effects at uh lucasite populations distant from the the GI tract. Um and so you know potentially influencing disease in the mammary gland or or or respiratory tissue.
(43:06) So one of the things I I want to highlight here is back to these biological modifying carbohydrates or polysaccharides. You know we talked about the man and oligosaccharides binding ecoli and salmonella. Um I want to focus a little bit on the betaglucan fractions. Okay I was kind of down on the betaglucan fractions uh when I was talking about binding because they really weren't effective at binding ecoli and salmonella.
(43:27) There is some effectiveness of betaglucans binding micotoxins. I didn't show that data, but uh what I want to focus here is how betaglucans actually can serve as there's receptors on on various immune cells and these these betaglucan fractions can actually liate or bind to those receptors altering their their functional activity.
(43:48) And so we did a study where we had fed uh some calves and at 21 days we took some blood samples um and looked at various carbohydrates. So we looked at different glucan fractions in in blood. And I just want to highlight uh the control versus the betaglucan fraction because that's where we had seen the the biggest difference.
(44:07) So this is just looking at the number of oligosaccharides or the the glucan fractions and the oligosaccharides. So this would just be two like glucose monomers linked together uh in blood. Um and so again this is relative abundance. And so what you see the the control caps um you know the big difference between the control caps in orange and the betaglucan cavs is you can see the betaglucan caps have fewer uh of these uh two length glucans together and they have much greater four six seven and eight.
(44:38) And so what this is actually showing is by supplementing various carbohydrates, we we are actually influencing the the alugosaccharide uh concentrations that we're seeing in blood. So like I I alluded to, there is a direct relationship where uh some of these glucan fractions can actually be absorbed uh likely intact to some degree um and be circulating in in in blood influencing the these immune cells.
(45:06) Um so this was a study that we did uh over a decade um and it's still unpublished but it was working with omnigen and again we this was when we were specifically looking at uh neutrfil function um around parturation so again time relative to cving day zero here and so a very common thing you typically see is around the day of cving you'll typically see a reduction in neutrfill function and again we're looking at the adhesion molecule And so um and then they they rebound.
(45:38) But the the interesting thing to to see here is the omnigen supplemented animals. And again I think it's fairly well known that part of the omnigen uh is including some of these betaglucan fractions uh in in different uh extracts. Um but what you see here is that the neutrfil supple or the omnigen supplemented animals had did not have that decreased neutrfll response around cving.
(46:04) So that it had recovered some of that response. And then when we looked at a generalized inflammation marker in blood, we saw that those omni or the control animals had elevated serum haptoglobin levels or or more inflammation at 14 days in milk relative to the omnigen supplemented animals. So again, you know, the the Omnigen supplement supplemented animals did not have that decreased neutrfil response at CVing resulting likely in in reduced uh inflammation uh in those animals uh in early lactation.
(46:37) And so kind of looking at betaglucan fractions to support neutrfil function, you know, prepppartum, let's just say, you know, neutrfil functions optimized at 100%. And at CVing uh you know in an unsupplemented group of animals without any betaglucan fractions you know that neutrfil response may decrease 30 to to 50%.
(46:59) Um whereas when we supplement those animals with betaglucan fractions we may recover that and we get 90 95% of that that function recovered uh in those animals. So again, this is just showing a a strategy um where we can modify a specific aspect of the immune system through nutrition. Um so the the last couple slides I just want to go through some practical applications, an example in a calf and a more broad example in either a lactating cow or a you know a weaning calf getting moved out of the hutch uh and being co-mingled.
(47:33) Uh so first looking at calves uh in the first couple weeks of life you know we know that they have a weak barrier function so their gastrointestinal tract is developing very rapidly um in the first couple weeks of life and that's why they're more susceptible to gastrointestinal disease scour dehydration.
(47:51) Um they do have an intact inflammatory response so they can produce a lot of inflammation which makes them really susceptible to developing uh sepsis if if the bacteria gets into blood. Um, so from a nutritional standpoint, I'm going to prioritize gut health. So I'm going to be looking at all kinds of strategies to reduce pathogen toxin exposure.
(48:10) I'm going to be looking at strategies to pro promote intestinal integrity. And really, you know, some of the actual things I'm going to be looking at are or the the targeted combination of nutritional strategies. I'm going to look at direct fed microbials. I'm going to look at some functional extracts um that are um helping stimulate uh intestinal integrity or uh or binding uh certain pathogens or micotoxins, plasma um potentially binding uh pathogens and then using ceramic binders as well.
(48:39) And then the expected outcome would be you know reduced intestinal damage uh more controlled inflammatory response and then uh an improved growth uh under under disease challenge. So here's a study that that we did uh a few years ago. And so this is looking at this is a survival curve. So at the start of the study, you know, day zero and then age of the calves.
(49:03) And so 100% of the calves started out alive. Um and then what you can see is within 21 days the control group about 50% of the calves had died. So this was a a group of 120 calves. Um it wasn't really designed necessarily to be such a high mortality. Um but they it was summer. These were colostrum deprived calves.
(49:23) We brought the calves in at 106. It was 106 the day we brought them in. So they were heat stressed. Um and ultimately what happened is all 120 calves developed scour and you know looking at what uh they were shedding. They were shedding pretty much everything. Roa, corona uh crypto salmonella everything was pretty much present.
(49:46) And so that's what rap resulted in a rapid mortality in this study. And then basically we went in with a combination treatment that's looking at gut health and the mortality in that treatment group was about 12% versus almost 50% in the the control group. So again it it did like all of these calves in in the treatment developed scour but it was a more balanced that it didn't overwhelm and we were able to save many of those calves.
(50:10) And then when we looked at the performance of those calves and let's just look at day 84 when they came out of the hutch. Typically at my Texas Tech model, I want those calves to be coming out of the hutch at 84 days of age, anywhere from 200 to 210 pounds. So the control cavs, only 50% of them were live and their performance was of the alive calves, their performance was decreased.
(50:34) Whereas the the calves that survived that were on the treatment, you know, their performance was as good or better than what we typically see in our our uh Texas Tech uh model. So, we saved more calves. Um, and we also those calves were productive. You know, when we look at I didn't really get into I could spend a lot of time talking about how stress is involved in the immune dysfunction of transition cows or uh calves.
(51:01) Um, but we we know that there's an immune dysfunction. And so one of the the strategies that I'm looking at again from from stress cattle whether or not it's a transition cow or a calf moving from a hutch into to group pens. Um again we'll we'll look at gut health. We're looking at some functional extracts. I'm also beyond just binding potential toxins in the GI tract.
(51:22) I'm also looking at things that may stimulate for example neutrfil function like those betalucan fractions. Um you know we also are uh looking at ceramic binders. You know our expected outcomes is that we would have a quicker more proportional immune response and thereby reduce disease risk whether or not it's mastitis or meritis in a early lactating cow or respiratory disease in in a calf that that we've just moved out of the hutch. So here's kind of my mantra.
(51:52) Um you know we want to have the right response. You know we want the response to to be proportional to the threat. We want it at the right timing. We want it to be quick and then we want to shut it down. And so anytime we can do that, you know, when we stress cattle, we know that some responses might be delayed.
(52:08) So, can we can we supplement something? Can we do something to to try to bring that back to to speed that that response back up that's going to allow it to respond correctly and then then shut it back down? Um, and so with that, um, here's some of my conflict of interest, but I'd like to open it up for some some questions.
(52:28) >> All right. Thank you very much. >> Success. >> Uh, before we get started with the Q&A portion, we'd like to share a brief video, then we'll be right back to answer the questions submitted during today's presentation. The economics of feeding reassure precision release choline. Reassure is fed during the transition period.
(52:57) And because it's fed for such a short period of time, it costs just $15 per cow. And yet, the benefits will continue to generate income throughout the year. Cowsfed reassure produced 5 lbs more colostrum, which pays for your reassure investment on the very first day of lactation. Cowsfed reassure also produce 5 pounds more milk per day every day.
(53:19) That means after the first day. Every day is payday. Invest in reassure during the transition period and recoup your investment on the very first day of lactation. After that, you got it. Payday. All right. Hey, as a reminder, you can still submit questions through the Q&A tab at the top of your screen. Dr.
(53:47) Blue, first question comes in from Tisha. Uh she says, "Thank you for a great talk. Uh in your study comparing El Selectin among cows called before uh 28 uh days in milk, after 28 days in milk and those not called, did you see any of elevated inflam inflammatory markers?" >> Yeah, that's a good good question. So I'd have to go back and look at specifically at uh that study again.
(54:15) Um but we Cameron actually published another study where we had actually looked at 10 different dairies and collecting information on and one of the things that we saw was those animals that had high inflammation early in lactation were associated with negative outcomes. And so whether or not that you know animals that had high inflammation in the first uh 28 days in milk and actually that that data was at seven days in milk um were more likely to to be cold uh during that lactation and were less likely to get pregnant.
(54:48) >> All right. >> So different study but but I think addressing the the question. >> Yeah. Uh Neland is asking is that ceramic binder available in Europe? I'd have to look to see if there's any ceramics available in in Europe. Um I the one that we work with is is not currently. Um but I I'd have to see if anybody else is is working with ceramic technology over there.
(55:16) >> You know the ceramics that's the first time I've heard about those. Uh Mike and So what makes them better or what is how do they work? >> Yeah. So, I mean it it it really is no different than I mean it starts out as a clay and actually that specific that specific ceramic that we work with is mined in the southern part of the US but then what happens is it goes through a furnace and so um and we've test we've evaluated the base clay versus after it's gone through the furnace and so really and if you just look at the
(55:46) electro microraphs you can see that it it gets a lot more poured the surface area goes up and I think that drives a lot of it um I think there is some change in the the we get some more hydrophobic interactions as well uh when it's been converted to a ceramic. Um and so yeah, really it's it's just a clay that's been processed through a furnace.
(56:07) I will tell you that we have learned that you can over run it through a furnace too for too long. And the interesting thing in that specific mineral deposit, it releases a sulfur compound because you can smell it if it gets over calsigned. >> Okay. >> So it's kind of an interesting thing. So I don't know if if the sulfur is somehow involved in anything or or what, but the actual minology changes too.
(56:29) It it changes more from a Montarillanite clay to an eliite. Um so if if you do like X-ray defraction and stuff like that, that the minology actually does change too. But I think a lot of it just has to do with changing the surface area. >> Okay. >> Or increasing the surface area. >> Yeah. Next question comes in from Laura.
(56:49) uh should depressed neutrfil function or exacerbated immune response be treated differently in the transition cap? >> So should suppressed neutrfil function or exacerbated? So the thing is is you have both potentially occurring and so you know I think when you put the two of them together you know this and then this goes up it it really creates a recipe for for a disaster.
(57:17) So I think if you can address both it's good. Um I think if you fix one it helps. Um but I think you get um you know a magnification of effect by trying to address both. >> You know the the the tricky thing is is you need some inflammation early in lactation because that that uterus is going through an involution which is an inflammatory process.
(57:45) Um, however, I will say that the uterus is fairly anti-inflammatory. So, the problem is is when the mamary gland is super inflammatory. So, you know, we've done a lot of stuff with endotoxin and sticking it in different places of cows and the uterus being one of them, the GI tract and the mammary gland.
(58:03) I've injected into blood, the peritineal cavity underneath the skin. The mammary gland is so sensitive. I joke that if I just wave a needle with endotoxin by the mamary gland, the cow's going to get inflammation. Um, so, you know, trying to suppress inflammation there, I think, is important. Um, from a mastitis standpoint.
(58:29) Um, but again, there there has to be some inflammation. You can't just completely knock inflammation out. And it it's hard to do that anyway. Um, so again, to keep it simple, there's two things at play. I think if you can can address both, I think you're going to see a magnification of of an effect. >> All right.
(58:48) Uh, interesting question coming in from Lawrence. Can a ceramic particle product be fed in milk or milk replacers and any impact on nutrient absorption? >> Good question. So, we do uh grind it super fine so it floats. So we we keep it in suspension in milk fairly well. Um so we we do do a lot of work with it feeding it in in milk.
(59:13) Um relative to uh nutrient binding, we did do a a wean pig trial at that five pound per ton and we've published that data. Um and so we did um an apparent digestibility of of macronutrients but also micronutrients specifically trace minerals. uh we used thamin as our water soluble marker and we used retinol as our vitamin A or fats soluble marker and we didn't see any difference in in apparent nutrient digestibility uh with pigs fed the ceramic particle at 5 pounds per ton or not and then we also harvested those pigs and sent the livers to Michigan
(59:46) State to look at mineral concentrations and didn't see any difference in in uh trace mineral uh concentrations in the liver. Okay, Mariana, she'd like to know um at what pH were the absorption analysis of the toxins bacteria performed? >> Yeah, so we've run the miccotoxin data both in more kind of neutral and we've also run them in more acidic.
(1:00:12) That specific data I think uh they they did it uh where they put it in acidic and then ran it also in a buffer to to get some release. Um, generally speaking, I will say your binding efficiency of micotoxins goes up as your pH goes down. Um, so now when I screen stuff or do things, I typically am running it under suboptimal conditions.
(1:00:38) So I'll typically personally in our lab will run it more in a buffered 7 pH um to to just look at differences. The EC coli salmonella, I'd have to go back and look. I think she was doing most of that work uh in a buffered saline. >> All right. Rolando is asking considering the shift from immun immunosuppression to uh immune dysfunction discussed in your presentation, how do you evaluate the specific impact of essential fatty acids on modulating the inflammatory mediators you mentioned? Additionally, in your experience, what are the most
(1:01:15) effective strategies for incorporating these essential lipids into nutritional programs to enhance immune resilience during the transition period? >> Yeah, good good uh good question. So, I most of my PhD work was done with omega-3 fatty acids trying to suppress inflammation in calves and then we did do a a transition cow study as well.
(1:01:38) And at that point I was actually trying to suppress inflammation. Um and so we were using the EPA DHAs and and doing a lot of that work. Um you know the the tricky thing is is yes you will get if if you can get some of these omega-3 fatty acids incorporating into cell membranes. Um it's easy to do it in a calf.
(1:02:01) Um, and so in a in a cow, you've got to use it in a protected or room inert source because one of the things we did find out in our early studies with transition cows is if you push too high levels of these polyunsaturated fatty acids, you can really disrupt rin fermentation as well. >> And so, you know, it it all comes down to >> how much um and it the more you feed, the more suppression you're going to get.
(1:02:28) You know, I used to be under the the standpoint of more is better. Um, but what I've I've learned over the the years is, you know, even supplementing some EPA and DHA, you know, in a few grams per day is going to be enough that you're going to start shifting some of the the fatty acid composition of immune cell membranes, and you'll you'll start seeing uh less inflammatory mediators being produced.
(1:02:55) So again, you know, in a calf, um, you know, adding one or two grams of EPA plus DHA, you'll get pretty dramatic changes in in fatty acid composition of those immune cell membranes. Um, you know, in a cow, again, you got to be a little bit careful. You can't feed just the free oils. Um, you got to be using a a rumin inert source. >> Yeah. Very well.
(1:03:17) I like this question coming in from uh Manuel. says, "Concerning the use of monogiosaccharides and betaglucans 13 and 16 in adult cows, there's a lot of information on their use in calves due to their immunological and intestinal function, but I would like to know your opinion regarding the degradation of betaglucans in the rin of adult cows and how much reaches the intestine.
(1:03:44) " Yeah, that's a a good question and you know that I'm going to say number one I think you get some reaching it because we do see biological like that that data that I showed with omnigen when you supplement this you we can see a change in physiology so I know there's some getting through and we are getting enough that it it does affect biological act biological activity the interesting thing that I showed in that calf and we tried to to go down this route a lot more um trying to quantify oligosaccharides throughout the GI tract and in that study where I showed the
(1:04:20) oligosaccharides in serum of calves that were supplemented the betaglucan fraction um you know we've tried to quantify that throughout the GI track we haven't been quite as successful as as what we saw in in in blood there the interesting thing looking at that you know we saw a shift from from two carbohydrates in the control more of those to four, five, six linkages, so longer ones.
(1:04:46) However, if you look at betaglucan fractions, they're going to be hundreds of glucose monomers length. So, I don't know if we're getting some degradation and change in, you know, we didn't quantify anything greater than eight in in blood. Um, but you know, what's the impact of of those ilosaccharides? Are they having some systemic impact? Um, so great question.
(1:05:08) I don't have all the answers other than I think that we are based on what we see changes in lucasite functionality and then some of that initial stuff where we quantified some of these ilosaccharides in blood we are seeing some shifts I don't know necessarily what it means but we are seeing some shifts and that that was done in a calf and we did that in a calf just to simplify take the rin out of the equation >> initially >> so I see we're at the a little past the top of the hour.
(1:05:40) You got got time for a couple more questions. >> I got to I I got to go teach uh proteins and amino acids, but I told the students I was going to be running late today. >> All right. U uh so let's uh let's let's end with this one here. Where do you see the biggest opportunity? Uh pathogen reduction or immune modulation? So, I like the question because it allows me to to give my new philosophy on life.
(1:06:11) I don't think it needs to be an or it can be an and. So, you know, we always ask we we try to reduce it down to one thing. And just the more I've I've done some of these things, I I try to look at things a little bit more holistically and and try to say, you know, I'm going to approach it multiple ways. And like if you looked at that data that we did with with the calf where I had 50% mortality like that that created a lot of problems and a lot of stress with the student with the animal care services.
(1:06:38) The interesting thing though is we saw a huge improvement and that really in that study we were throwing kind of the kitchen sink. We we sat there as a group and said what if we were design an optimal gut health you know what are the things we have in our toolbox? Let's put it together.
(1:06:56) and it actually ended up working out well enough that we had a huge disease pressure in that one and we were able to show a show some differences. So, you know, I'm not I don't want to try to target anything specific. I try to look at, you know, like we we talked about should we reduce inflammation or should we try to stimulate neutrfil responses in a transition cal. The answer is yes.
(1:07:18) We should do both or we should try to do a little bit of both. You know, to try to take inflammation from here down to here probably not what we want to do anyways. We want to be maybe taking it from here to here. Um, you know, the poultry industry has basically bred the inflammatory response out. So, their inflammatory response is, you know, no longer here like a cow.
(1:07:40) It's all the way down here. And that serves a purpose for them, but I don't think we need to to to be doing that either. So, you know, I I look at immune modulation. I look at pathogen reduction. Um, you know, the funny thing, I'll just leave it here, is, you know, I've gotten into the microtoxin uh arena the last 10 years.
(1:07:58) And when you look at research, you know, we use these FDA limits. Oh, it doesn't meet the FDA limits on this analysis feed analysis, so it's not an issue. All the research that's being done in these challenges are below the FDA levels. And the the conclusion is always, oh, we even saw a reduction in performance even though we were below these FDA levels.
(1:08:18) The FDA levels have nothing to do with animal performance. And so, you know, I think animals are constantly exposed to to pathogens, toxins, and things like that. Should we be feeding, you know, things that help mitigate against micotoxins? Yes. You know, like when bird flu came out, it was kind of like I didn't know exactly what it was and we thought maybe it was somehow GI and I was like, okay, maybe the ceramic particle does something.
(1:08:40) you know, come to find out it probably did nothing directly against high pathogen avenu influenza, but was there some ancillary benefits because it was helping prevent some other things that were at play too that were, you know, compounding on the the effects of bird flu potentially. And so I I try to look at a little bit more of a holistic uh standpoint.
(1:09:03) >> Very well. Well, great presentation today. I want to thank you for joining us. Uh it's been been very interesting and for everyone uh I want to thank you for attending today's webinar. If you have additional questions, please submit them to ah.marketing atbalkim.com.