4683J. Dairy Sci.  95 :4683–4698
http://dx.doi.org/  10.3168/jds.2011-5214  
© American Dairy Science Association®,  2012 .
 ABSTRACT 
 This study contributes to the research literature by 
providing a new formulation for the cow replacement 
problem, and it also contributes to the Extension de-liverables by providing a user-friendly decision support system tool that would more likely be adopted and applied for practical decision making. The cow value, its related values of a new pregnancy and a pregnancy loss, and their associated replacement policies deter-mine profitability in dairy farming. One objective of this study was to present a simple, interactive, dy-namic, and robust formulation of the cow value and the replacement problem, including expectancy of the future production of the cow and the genetic gain of the replacement. The proven hypothesis of this study was that all the above requirements could be achieved by using a Markov chain algorithm. The Markov chain model allowed (1) calculation of a forward expected value of a studied cow and its replacement; (2) use of a single model (the Markov chain) to calculate both the replacement policies and the herd statistics; (3) use of a predefined, preestablished farm reproductive replace-ment policy; (4) inclusion of a farmer’s assessment of the expected future performance of a cow; (5) inclusion of a farmer’s assessment of genetic gain with a replace-ment; and (6) use of a simple spreadsheet or an online system to implement the decision support system. Results clearly demonstrated that the decision policies found with the Markov chain model were consistent with more complex dynamic programming models. The final user-friendly decision support tool is available at http://dairymgt.info/ → Tools → The Economic Value of a Dairy Cow. This tool calculates the cow value in-stantaneously and is highly interactive, dynamic, and robust. When a Wisconsin dairy farm was studied us-ing the model, the solution policy called for replacing nonpregnant cows 11 mo after calving or months in milk (MIM) if in the first lactation and 9 MIM if in later lactations. The cow value for an average second-lactation cow was as follows: (1) when nonpregnant, (a) $897 in MIM = 1 and (b) $68 in MIM = 8; (2) when the cow just became pregnant,( a) $889 for a pregnancy in MIM = 3 and (b) $298 for a pregnancy in MIM = 8; and (3) the value of a pregnancy loss when a cow became pregnant in MIM = 5 was (a) $221 when the loss was in the first month of pregnancy and (b) $897 when the loss was in the ninth month of pregnancy. The cow value indicated pregnant cows should be kept. The expected future production of a cow with respect to a similar average cow was an important determinant in the cow replacement decision. The expected produc-tion in the rest of the lactation was more important for nonpregnant cows, and the expected production in successive lactations was more important for pregnant cows. A 120% expected milk production for a cow with MIM = 16 and 6 mo pregnant in the present lactation or in successive lactations determined between 1.52 and 6.48 times the cow value, respectively, of an average production cow. The cow value decreased by $211 for every 1 percentage point of expected genetic gain of the replacement. A break-even analysis of the cow value with respect to expected milk production of an average second-parity cow indicated that (1) nonpregnant cows in MIM = 1 and 8 could still remain in the herd if they produced at least 84 and 98% in the present lactation or if they produced at least 78 and 97% in future lacta-tions, respectively; and (2) cows becoming pregnant in MIM = 5 would require at least 64% of milk production in the rest of the lactation or 93% in successive lacta-tions to remain in the herd.  Key words:   dynamic programming , Markov chain , 
herd simulation , replacement policy 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Estimating the value of future performance of a cow 
and future performance of a cow replacement as well as 
herd replacement decisions and policies in dairy farm-ing are critical because they determine profitability   A simple formulation and solution to the replacement problem: 
A practical tool to assess the economic cow value, the value 
of a new pregnancy, and the cost of a pregnancy loss 
  V. E.   Cabrera 1
  Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706   
  
 Received November 30, 2011.
 Accepted April 10, 2012.   1   Corresponding author:  vcabrera@wisc.edu 
4684 CABRERA
Journal of Dairy Science Vol. 95 No. 8, 2012(de Vries, 2006; Heikkilä et al., 2008; Cabrera, 2010). 
Dynamic programming (DP) based on Bellman’s prin-ciple of optimality (Bellman, 1957) remains the state of the art to calculate the economic cow value (de Vries, 2006; Cabrera, 2010; Kalantari et al., 2010). However, a problem with DP formulation is the complexity of the model, which easily becomes very large and complicat-ed (Demeter et al., 2011), with limited applicability to real-life problems, and is impractical for user-friendly decision support systems and for the day-to-day deci-sions of farmers (Smith et al., 1993; Groenendaal et al., 2004). For these reasons, Groenendaal et al. (2004) justified the use of the marginal net revenue method instead of DP to assess the cow value. They concluded that the marginal net review method accurately mod-eled the replacement problem and that, overall, their results were in agreement with previous studies us-ing more complicated formulations of DP. They also indicated that because the model was contained in a spreadsheet, which is more familiar to dairy decision makers, it was better suited to support on-farm deci-sions. Nonetheless, they recognized that the marginal net revenue technique they used had important limita-tions, such as not including variation in expected cow performance and replacement genetic gain in the deci-sions.
The economic cow value is the difference between the 
discounted net return of a specific cow being evaluated and an average replacement cow (Eicker and Fetrow, 2003). If this value is positive, it is recommended to keep the cow, and if it is negative, it is recommended to replace the cow (de Vries, 2004) because these decisions will improve the overall herd net return.
Standard DP is an iterative process of optimization 
that normally works backward from the future to the present. It calculates, in each iteration, the value of the cow if kept and the value of the cow if replaced. It uses the maximum of those values to connect from one itera-tion to the next, constructing an optimal replacement policy (Kristensen, 1987). Lactation state, pregnancy status, milk production, and other factors largely influ-ence this pathway (de Vries, 2004, 2006). Results of a 
DP solution could show a matrix of cow values for all potential states of a cow. Some of these states would represent existing cows on a farm. However, thousands of those values would not represent an existing cow on a farm. Moreover, farmers know those cows that have a greater risk of being replaced at any specific point in time. Therefore, several calculations could be avoided or skipped to simplify the problem being solved. In addition, DP results are normally to be used with a second model, a Markov chain model, to calculate the resulting herd population, the overall herd net return, and other economic and herd structural parameters re-sponding to a DP optimal policy (de Vries, 2004, 2006; Kalantari et al., 2010).
The challenge, then, is to develop a simple algorithm 
to solve the replacement problem, address previous limitations of a simple problem formulation to include variations in cow performance and replacement genetic gain, and maintain an application that is highly user friendly and practical. This could be achieved by using solely the Markov chain model (St-Pierre and Jones, 2001; Cabrera et al., 2006,2008) to simulate the herd dynamics and then apply this value to the replacement problem by assessing the future profitability of the cow and the replacement. A limitation of this approach could be that, rather than an optimization, Markov chain is a simulation technique that requires a predefined original reproductive replacement policy. Nonetheless, this predefined reproductive replacement policy may be more aligned with the actual way commercial dairy farms operate. Over time, an interactive process with the model could be practiced to adjust this original policy by considering other farm constraints and goals. Normally, DP assumes an optimal policy for decisions in the future, and such a policy may not be achievable in real-life commercial dairy farm conditions.
Although DP results can give a full spectrum of cow 
value results for all potential cow states in a defined problem (Kalantari et al., 2010), the studies reported in the literature for DP did not present an opportunity to introduce external (out-of-the-model) parameters to interact with the model through recursive solutions. Specifically, it would be highly desirable to allow the decision maker to project the production performance of a specific cow being analyzed or estimate the ex-pected genetic gain with a replacement. Allowing the decision maker to enter his or her knowledge and intu-ition goes beyond the full spectrum of model results and would provide a new dimension in the decision-making process. For instance, a farmer could use historical information on the animal, current health conditions, treatments required, and overall experience with the herd, combined with the modeling approach, to decide whether to keep or replace an animal.
The purpose of this study was then to (1) present 
a simple, interactive, dynamic, and robust formulation of the cow value and replacement problem based on a Markov chain model and develop a user-friendly deci-sion support system based on the model formulation; and (2) describe the outcomes of the model within realistic scenarios.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Based on the brief background above, the replace-
ment problem was set to be solved by approximation 
Journal of Dairy Science Vol. 95 No. 8, 2012OUR INDUSTRY TODAY 4685
by a simple algorithm alone based on a Markov chain 
model. The problem was further simplified because the value of a replacement remained constant for a defined level of genetic gain and defined herd parameters.
Under these premises, the replacement problem was 
solved by calculating the net present value (NPV) expected of a cow (NPV Cow) minus the net present value of a replacement (NPV Replacement) plus the cost of the replacement transaction, which included the cost of the replacement animal, the income received by the salvage value (of the replaced cow), and the calf born (to the replacement cow):
cow value = (NPV cow − NPV replacement)  
+ (replacement cost − cow salvage value  
− calf value).
The Markov Chain Cow Value Model 
A dairy herd was represented by a monthly Mar-
kov chain model as a matrix. Three states defined all potential cow states with respect to (1) months after calving or months in milk (MIM; 1 to 33), (2) months in pregnancy (MIP; 0 for nonpregnant, and 1 to 9 for pregnant), and (3) lactation (PAR ; 1 to 10). The total 
number of states of the matrix was 2,320 after exclud-ing impossible states (Cabrera et al., 2006).
The proportions of a cow (COW
PAR,MIM,MIP ) over time 
were simulated through Markov chains following previ-ous models (St-Pierre and Jones, 2001; Cabrera et al., 2008; Bell et al., 2011). Vectors of transition probabili-ties with the dimension model represented the prob-abilities of a cow leaving the herd (CULL), becoming pregnant (PRG), and aborting (ABORT). Transition probabilities of a cow leaving the herd included nonre-productive culling, reproductive culling, and mortality. For simplicity in the formulation of the problem, they are all denoted with CULL.
The fractions of a cow in a state in the next month 
(COW
MIM+1,MIP,PAR ) were simulated following the equa-
tions below:Proportions of a nonpregnant cow remaining in the herd and not becoming pregnant:
(COW
MIM+1,0,PAR ) = (COW MIM,0,PAR ) 
(1 − CULL MIM,0,PAR )(1 − PRG MIM,0,PAR );
Proportions of a nonpregnant cow remaining in the herd and becoming pregnant:
(COW
MIM+1,1,PAR ) = (COW MIM,0,PAR ) 
(1 − CULL MIM,0,PAR )(1 − PRG MIM,0,PAR );Proportions of a pregnant cow remaining in the herd and not aborting:
(COW
MIM+1,PRG+1,PAR ) = (COW MIM,MIP,PAR ) 
(1 − CULL MIM,MIP,PAR )(1 − ABORT MIM,MIP,PAR );
Proportions of a pregnant cow remaining in the herd and aborting:
(COW
MIM+1,0,PAR ) = (COW MIM,MIP,PAR ) 
(1 − CULL MIM,MIP,PAR )(1 − ABORT MIM,MIP,PAR );
Proportions of a cow calving and moving to a subse-quent parity:
 COW
COW 1 CULL 1 ABORT1,0,PAR+1
MIM,9,PAR MIM,9,PAR MIM,9()
() ( )=
−−,,PAR
MIM()
=∑
1133
, 
Proportions of a cow leaving the herd (CULL) for any 
reason (nonreproductive culling, reproductive culling, or mortality) were replaced with a first month in milk (MIM = 1), nonpregnant (MIP = 0), and first parity (PAR = 1) replacement cow (COW
1,0,1; de Vries, 2004; 
Cabrera et al., 2006, 2008). Therefore,
 COW1,0,1
COW CULLMIM,MIP,PAR MIM,MIP,PAR
PAR MIP()
()()=
= =∑ .
110
09 9
1133
∑
=∑
MIM 
The cow being evaluated and its potential replace-
ment differed only in their current state: the replace-
ment was always a cow beginning the iterative process of the Markov chain as a cow in MIM = 1, MIP = 0, and PAR = 1 (COW
1,0,1), whereas the cow being ana-
lyzed could be in any state defined in the model. The probabilistic life of a cow or a replacement was then represented from the time the cow was being analyzed to a point in the future when the cow and all its re-placements had reached the Markov chain condition of steady state (Cabrera and Giordano, 2010). At the first iteration (same point in time, same month), the cow being analyzed and the replacement cow are in different states. Over the long term, at some time in the future, the probabilities of a cow in all states defined in the model no longer change from one iteration to the next. This is known as the Markov chain condition of steady state. The model reaches a steady state regardless of the current state of the cow or replacement in the first iteration (Hillier and Lieberman, 1986). Therefore, the 
