Good evening, everyone, and welcome to the Real Science Exchange, the public asks for
leading scientists and industry professionals, meet over a few drinks to discuss latest
ideas and trends in animal nutrition.
In this episode, Dr. Kelly Nichols of UC Davis breaks down nitrogen efficiency, and it's
growing importance for sustainability, high-performing dairy nutrition programs.
Alongside, co-host Jonas D'Souza and Ben Winter from Feedworks, we here to have a discussion
that connects nutrient utilization within environmental and economic outcomes.
So, Kelly, this is not your first time to the pub, so welcome, but it is your first time
in person.
Yeah, it is.
Yeah, thank you for joining us.
Thank you for having me.
And Dr. Jonas D'Souza, you're going to be the co-host today, tell us a little bit about
yourself, sir.
Yeah.
So, not my first time here.
No.
Yeah, I'm originally from Brazil, moved to the U.S. 12 years ago, actually, doing my master,
I work on Ben's PhD project, so it's a very small world, right?
Yes, it is.
We've just firking the Ohio State, then I did my PhD, Michigan State, and in 2018, I joined
Purdue.
First, in a technical role, moved to the West Coast, primarily helped on the West's side
of our business, and then moved back to the residing Florida, and I lead our technical
energy team for Purdue and the administration.
Yeah, not that far from here, right?
Not far from here.
Not far from here.
Yes, I'm about 15 minutes down the road.
Okay, very well.
Dr. Ferkins was my daughter's advisor for a small while.
She went to Ohio State and kind of dropped out during COVID, so trying to get her back.
Dr. Ben winner, tell us about yourself, sir, this is your first time at the pub, and so
welcome.
It is.
And I'm drinking water.
You're drinking water so much, though.
Some people will be surprised later, right?
Yes.
Yeah.
So, yeah, Jonas made a nice trivia to the first time we met, which was a really great summer.
And I had just finished a master's actually in swine, that people don't know that I did
some work in swine before I found the bright side and came back over to Derry.
So I did a PhD with not Bill, but Norm and Ferkins and Hanigan, and actually a couple other
great microbiologists there at Ohio State as EG and U, and was kind of a stacked group,
and went to work for Purdue afterwards in technical service, and we almost crossed over,
maybe by a couple of weeks, and taught at Ohio State, and many students actually probably
called it a day during COVID, and it was a very different student environment.
Yes, tough times.
It was.
And after 2024, I left and came over to feed work, so all things technical at this point
for feed works on their room and its side.
Yeah.
There's another gentleman at feed works by name of Tom Elliott.
I've asked him to come on the podcast several times.
He's not done it yet, but he does have a lot of advice for me.
I think I've got opinions.
You can get the two of us on sometime together.
I'll do that.
Absolutely.
Kelly, let's get started.
Why don't you tell us a little bit about the presentation that you've given here at
the Florida Ruminant Nutrition Symposia.
Balchem is invested decades, perfecting the art of nutrients and encapsulation.
And now, no amina surex cell is setting a new standard, delivering 35% more metabolizable
lysine than leading competitors.
With amina surex cell, you can provide your cows with a more consistent and higher quality
source of metabolizable lysine, leading to improved and more dependable results.
A recent meta-analysis found that feeding room and protected lysine led to an increase
in milk fat percentage and 4.4 more pounds of energy-corrected milk.
Feed new amina surex cell to your cows and have confidence that you're using the most
consistent, reliable, and cost-effective source of lysine on the market today.
Learn more at balchem.com-slash-excel.
Yeah, sure.
So my talk this morning focused on protein efficiency, nitrogen efficiency, really with
a focus on reducing nitrogen excretion from dairy cattle.
So I made reference to I'm Canadian.
I did my undergrad at my masters at the University of Guelph, and that's when I kind of started
this trajectory on looking at protein metabolism in dairy cattle and the interaction with energy,
source, and supply.
But at that time when I was learning how to position this work, it was very much focused
on from the efficiency side how to optimize these expensive ingredients.
So the protein rich resources, interaction, to make sure that as much as possible is going
into milk, and then you're wasting less money essentially having it come out under the
tail of the cow.
I then moved to the Netherlands where I did my PhD of Atherning University, and when
I moved there, it was kind of at the height of one of their more recent waves of concern
around nitrogen emission in northwestern Europe.
And I got a quick pivot in terms of how to position that type of work, which is actually
doesn't have very much to do with the cost of rations, but the intense pressure that farmers
faced around reducing the amount of nitrogen in manure.
Because they're just simply, they were being charged a lot of money and fined and forced
to, in some cases, actually close their family farms because they couldn't deposit all of
the nitrogen that was coming out in manure.
So after spending all those years working at the university on that topic, very closely
related or working with industry, and then also joined industry myself for a few years,
I really figured out how to kind of position optimizing protein nutrition with that story
of reducing nitrogen excretion.
Now that I'm over here in the United States again, or back in the US, back in North America,
in a place like California, where I was told that all of the environmental concerns that
start in northwestern Europe, they come across the ocean, they land first in California.
So it was the same thing with methane, and now it's again happening with nitrogen.
So in my region where I work now, it's kind of the same story.
Of course, costs in the US is still probably more important here than it is currently in
the Netherlands, for example, but certainly the excretion side, it's starting to become
a bigger part of the picture.
So the talk I gave this morning was ways that we can, well, first of all, just raising
awareness around the potentially looming importance and growing importance of regulation
around nitrogen excretion from agriculture, from dairy farms, but then also looking at
some of the strategies we have in terms of currently based on our current knowledge, manipulating
rations, thinking about ways to reduce total crude protein content, and maybe optimize
that with energy supply and source, and then looking to the future, some of the ways that
with more research, we can hopefully optimize that even further, like on the rumored nitrogen
balance, urea recycling, looking, learning even more than we already do about amino acid
efficiencies, those types of things.
Okay, and what kind of strategies did you share some strategies today with the audience?
Yeah, so I talked about three main things.
So one being the impact of energy source.
So I guess the main take home message from that is we're starting to represent amino acid
requirements on a gram per energy basis, so MCAL of ME, for example, does the source
of that ME really matter?
So is it coming more from glucogenic sources, like corn silage, heavy ration, or more
lipogenic sources, so a more fiber-based ration or fat supplementation, what we see across
the literature work from my group and others, Jonas as well, looking at the differences in
terms of the metabolic response of dairy cows to energy source, and have the impact of
that on protein efficiency.
So that's one of them.
The second one was kind of a maybe more loose point around rumored nitrogen balance.
So when I was working in the Netherlands, we kind of saw that as a bit of the low-hanging
fruit in terms of impractice, a lot of dairy nutritionists probably overfeed rum-integratable
protein pretty considerably, and in a kind of climate like that where you're really
focused on reducing urinary nitrogen, that's an area where just raising the awareness
of particularly in your really well-managed herds, can you start to dial that back?
Do you really need to add in an extra, you know, so many grams of urea to just keep the
bugs happy?
Where are kind of the margins there?
And then that links to my own interest in urea recycling.
So starting to understand more about how that mechanism is working in particularly lactating
dairy cattle.
Historically, most of the research has been in ruminants, has been in growing cattle and
sheep.
Of course, the diets for feeding these animals are completely different, the way they're
managed like young animals, completely different in a lot of cases.
So is there more we can learn about the regulation of urea recycling in lactating dairy cows that
could potentially position endogenous nitrogen, mainly urea, as a source that we can rely
on a little bit more as basically a room in available nitrogen source.
So that's a little bit, we're doing some work on that at UCD of us currently, but that's
maybe a bit of an outlook for the future.
And then the third one was focusing on flexibility in terms of mammary gland and amino acid utilization.
This is something that, yeah, there's been a lot of incredible research on this for many
years, long before I was involved in any of it.
Something that I highlighted is the idea that there's a lot of intramamory flexibility around
essential amino acid use.
So we have these different groups of amino acids, pretty characteristically the group ones
being taken up in a one-to-one ratio with their output in milk.
That has our histidine, methionine and lysine, or sorry, histidine, methionine in particular.
So those are ones we can currently feed as room in protected products.
Then we have the rest of the essentials, basically, that can be taken up kind of, they're taken
up and usually excess relative to their output in milk, but what we've seen is there's a lot
of flexibility in their utilization within the mammary gland.
So is there an opportunity to start looking at digestible amino acid supply, not necessarily
focusing so much on those individual group two amino acids, but more as a group.
And if we could target their supply as a group, is there enough flexibility within them
that we don't have to put so much emphasis on them as individuals?
And does that give us then more flexibility in our actual formulation?
And starting to think about some of the ingredients that we feed, how well characterized are
they in terms of their contribution to digestible amino acid supply of basically amino acids
other than methionine and histidine?
So those were the three main areas that I kind of touched on in position around how
that could ultimately influence nitrogen efficiency dairy cows.
And so one last question, and I will turn it over to you guys, and you guys, if you've
listened to the podcast before, you know I can get carried away with the question.
So elbow your way in, I won't be offended.
But I'm kind of curious, how do you measure nitrogen efficiency?
Is it nitrogen excretion per unit of milk or per cow or how do you do that?
Yeah, I mean, the most classic is feed nitrogen relative to milk nitrogen.
So that's the measure that you're probably seeing most often in any kind of published
papers.
And that's still from a, even from a in practice standpoint, you know at least the crude
protein content of your diet.
And you can make some kind of estimate of feed intake and you know what's coming out in
your bulk tank.
Like that calculation, how from I think it may be depend the situation you're in in terms
of what are you targeting more that transfer into milk that you want to optimize or reducing
the excretion in manure.
That would influence what type of efficiency you're looking at in theory.
We would want to say that if more is going into milk less is going out in manure, but
that's actually not the case.
You can jack up crude protein content and you'll get more in milk, but you'll also get
more out in in manure.
So if you're really looking at efficiency, it can depend if you're a dairy farmer in
the Central Valley of California trying to, you know, you're being impacted by nitrate
regulations, you might be more concerned about how much is going out in manure, whereas
if you don't have those types of concerns, your protein efficiency in terms of the value
of what you're putting in feed relative to the value you're getting out of milk, that's
going to be what you're more concerned about.
Yeah.
Okay.
So if I can lead off with a question, I asked you earlier, so you've not been surprised.
But when you're talking about the glucogenic pathways, right, and you kind of emphasize
that when we have a glucogenic pathway, we have less mammary lipogenesis and more non-memory
lipogenesis.
Did I get that right?
Yeah.
There's more non-memory or there's signaling to non-memory lipogenetic issues.
Yeah.
Okay.
That's closer than I thought I was going to get.
And so then the question I had asked, and I think people would be interested in hearing
about, was if there was a difference in room and degradable starch that led to propionate
versus the glucogenic, you know, where we absorb glucose through the small intestine, if
you want to revisit that.
Yeah, yeah, sure.
So, yeah, that's a great point.
When we talk about glucogenic diet, what does that mean, and same thing, lipogenic diet,
what does that mean?
And of course, when we're looking at practical diets, nothing can be characterized as 100%
one or 100% the other.
So the future of this work would also be the nuance and kind of the gradient of lipogenic,
glucogenic, and then the metabolites that come from that.
So that's what your question is getting out on the glucogenic side.
So what we've seen, so the response that I showed in my presentation where we see this,
when you increase glucose concentration in the blood through these glucogenic diets, you
decrease, a pre-distinct decrease in arterial concentration of branch chain amino acids and
in our lipogenic precursors like acetate and BHB. We see that in studies whether they have fed
a star-trich diet, whether they've done ruminal infusions of propionate, arterial or sort of
jugular infusions of glucose, or post-ruminal, so omasilar, abamasilar infusions of glucose.
So it seems to be the ultimate glucose metabolite, regardless of how it gets there,
that seems to trigger this response. Yeah, and it's somewhat similar as well on the lipogenic
side, I would say, but it's really not been well characterized in terms of there's just far far
fewer studies that have looked at the response of feeding fat or infusing something like acetate
into the ruminal or the blood on amino acid metabolism, protein efficiency, any of it.
I think you think more on, so your question, what you were thinking is like about
site of digestum basically, right? I thought that would matter, and it sounds like from the data
it probably doesn't. Interesting. Yeah, because I assume the same, right? So if you have more
fermentable starch into rumine, you also might influence microbial protein synthesis, right? So
how do you differentiate that? But yeah, it's interesting to think that, regardless, it seems
that there's a glucose regulation, maybe insulin-driven or some signaling after, right?
Yeah, it's certainly very post-absorbed of what's happening before you, like you say,
there could be a whole host of other influences from the feeding versus obviously infusing
when I'm doing that in practice. Yeah, of course. Well, it's just interesting, because there's been
some of that feedback from the field that said, oh, well, if I push my rumina gradeable starch
for more bypass, I tend to end up with calcium or back fats that are more milk production,
right? Like there's this perception, I have more blood glucose, because the glucose was
absorbed in the hind gut instead of in the rumine, as prokenate. And it sounds like maybe,
that's not, that's just a perception in the field and maybe not reality.
Yeah, and what else could be going on there that's causing the responses they're seeing that
actually is not related to this mechanism. If they're absorbing a lot of glucose from the hind gut,
there might be something else going on there. Yeah. So, when you define sustainable nutrition,
are you talking specifically about excretion meant into the environment, or is there a nuance
definition for that? Yeah, no, I think you can look at it. What first comes to my discussion
on the protein side, and I guess you could think of this for all nutrients that we're trying to
get into cows. There's the excretion side of it, but also looking at what we're putting in our
diets. And I think I mentioned in one of the early slides cost, but also availability. And that's
a big one. We have certainly living in California. I've seen a whole host of diverse ingredients
that I'd never had any experience with. Sometimes this work that I do feels like a drop in the bucket
when a nutritionist is dealing with a different batch of agricultural waste byproduct every week
coming to a farm. How do you even account for that? Much less worry about your digestible amino
acid supply. But the point is, I think some of these, when I talk about metabolic flexibility and
really raising awareness around that, how does that actually help us in the future when
resource, common resource supplies, their shortages, or like, for example, when I was in Europe,
depending on the political climate, where you are, what normal resource feed resources are
available based on what can get across a board or what costs more all of a sudden. These types
of challenges that are very real, no matter where you live at the moment, it seems. Does that give
more flexibility for nutritionists for producers to include different ingredients and rations without
this assumption that there's going to be a huge hit or a huge change in how their animals are
able to digest and ultimately absorb and metabolize those nutrients. So kind of cracking open some
of these areas around that flexibility and understanding the scope of it does that then give us more
flexibility in our ration formulation as well without those worries. So that, to me, is also sustainability.
It's sustainability of being able to feed the cows and keep doing what we're doing. Yeah.
Would you revisit for me one of the graphs that I immediately saw because it said sheep, right?
That's probably what it was. But they had the sheep and they had the dry cows and at the lactating
cows and had the data for different nitrogen recycling. And would you mind revisiting that because
it was interesting to me the spread related to the data and also the variation in efficiencies.
Yeah. So that was just a summary of data that I put together for review paper that I wrote during
my time at Trion Nutrition. So it represents the proportion of urea nitrogen that gets recycled
to the gastrointestinal tract and Jose called me out and asked, yeah, is that the rumen or is it
the hanga and how much? And I did not have a good answer for him. Unfortunately, apparently the majority
goes to the rumen was not refined enough, but that is the best that I can say. So the proportion that
gets recycled to the gastrointestinal tract, I would say the majority of the rumen, relative to the
nitrogen intake of those animals. And it was a spread of all the studies that I could find at
the time where urea recycling had been measured in either sheep, non-lectating cattle,
some mostly growing beef animals or dairy cows. And each dot represented a study and then you
have the spread of that magnitude with the averages there. So for sheep and non-lectating cattle,
the main thing that usually strikes people is there's a lot more dots than in the column with
the dairy cows and the spread of that is a lot wider as well. So the spread, I think for the sheep,
the averages 1.09 or something, which basically means that as much digestible nitrogen intake that
they consume gets recycled. It's like a 1 to 1 in sheep, non-lectating cattle, I think it's 0.8.
And then in cattle, it was 0.6 or something around those numbers with slightly smaller spreads and
a very small spread for dairy cows. So that's what that's showing that our sheep seem to have this
greater capacity to recycle nitrogen. There's a few different kind of things you have to think about
based on what the data is showing. The nitrogen intake of those animals is, I mean, this is relative
to nitrogen intake. So the sources of that, the sources of the carbohydrates in those diets,
how much in total we're feeding of nitrogen to sheep growing cattle versus our high producing
lactating dairy cows, I think that accounts for some of the difference in those means.
But then the other striking thing is just how few studies are actually part of that pile of data
from lactating cows. So there's only a handful of studies that have really started to look into
that. And I think there's enough differences in the types of diets we're feeding and how those
animals are raised to really question, like you can't say they're just less efficient at recycling
nitrogen. There's probably some reasons for that. At least that's kind of what I came to after
diving into all that data and thinking about where do we need to go next to look at your
re-recycling in dairy cows. Well, and if you look through JDS in the 50s, 60s, 70s, a lot of those
animals were sheep, right? Yeah. A lot of the JDS research animals were sheep. And I guess I was
curious. Someone even had names in it. And I was just curious if maybe some of that bias with all
the extra data and sheep was because we were using the sheep for a dairy model. Because I was surprised,
I would have, when I taught students, I would have stereotyped that the dairy cow was probably one
of the best researched livestock production systems there was. We have so much data on the dairy
cow. Yeah, at least on the re-recycling side. I don't know why it's been biased that way.
I mean, the studies are hard to do. So maybe that's why. But I think also the grazing aspect,
and that's how I got into this question was some work we had going on at Trowel looking at
tropical grazing in Brazil. And they, you know, they really rely on that, that infrequent protein
supplementation when animals are on pasture. How can they optimize, get that nitrogen intake into
those animals and allow it to actually just do its thing and be recycled and be used for microbial
protein synthesis. So as someone who up till that point essentially perhended that the room and
didn't exist, that all cracked open all kinds of questions for me. But again, that all came out
of this this grazing model. So perhaps that's why as well. It's more relevant when you have animals
on pasture and you want to decide can we actually give them their protein concentrate once a week,
twice a week. How does this recycling mechanism allow us to have some more utility there?
Of course, in intensively managed dairy cows, that's not a question we have.
It's interesting. And now maybe we are a little bit to be blamed by this, but every time I do
recommendations in the field, you know, I usually say don't short RDP, right? And maybe this
is a big wise effect. I've seen this many of his presentations and if you look to some of his
papers and his diets, he usually overfeed RDP because it doesn't want to short the room in, right?
When we do that, we definitely are not taking advantage of the recycling. And so are we going too far
in terms of RDP or what should there be or go in terms of should we always focus on having a zero
room in nitrogen balance? That's my question. Or we start to be in some situations limiting
other growth and other digestibility, for example. Yeah, I'm super fascinated. This is something where
I'm not a room in microbiologist, like I said, have spent very little time actually considering
the room in the whole thing. So I'm curious, would you think Ben about this from the more
room in expert side? Because indeed, you can't play around too much with reducing there. And
when I give that story, I always want to caveat it with there's so it's always, well, it depends
on every situation. But in this case, it's very true, right? Also, coming from a European experience
where some places don't have that much access to corn silage. That's certainly not the base of
diets in every case over there. I have to remember over here, we're putting in so much for
medical carbohydrate. If our diets are based on corn silage, they can probably handle a lot more
room in degradable protein, whereas like I started out saying in, for example, the Netherlands,
you have rations based on grass silage, where they're putting more and more urea on top. And I'm
just not sure that that's doing anything, especially like I said, when you really want to reduce
nitrogen excretion, but yeah, we can't do that at the expense of functioning room in. So I'm
curious what you think about that. We can't all be that good at growing forages, right?
You know, it's just a good answer. Looking at the diet for a farm in Ireland last week.
And I couldn't find a, it's like, don't you have any lower protein forage options that we could
put in here? So you were looking for some straw. That's why they were looking nice. And he says,
well, we have to import the straw. Yeah. I told him to just take a tree and run it through a wood
chipper. And that would probably work. And that led to some interesting stories. I don't,
I don't know. I think, and Jonas probably knows this, but my initial feat to the fire
response is probably always going to be room in degradability first, right? So if I prioritize
room in degradability of starch and room in degradability of fiber and room in degradability
of protein, probably in more than one form, then I have maximized the efficiency of the,
the thing that makes the animal special, right? Because what I would always argue is if I really
truly cared about nitrogen efficiency, I wouldn't raise cows, right? What makes them so unique is
that they can take all these alternative products. And so you think systemically about sustainability
and about environmental impact. And I think I have to be willing to accept some nitrogen
and efficiency, despite what the Californians are, you know, worried about to extend some carbon
sustainability and also provide, you know, a high quality product to people which has its own
sustainability impact. But if I can prioritize room in degradability first, I can drive more
microbial protein. And that might be the question I think you have to decide at your core before
you decide where to go first. So, right, if I think about an RDP limit and I say it's got to be 10%
or 9.5 or 10.5, we can argue about that. And Peter Yoder and I had done that project where we,
when we were still at Purdue, where we tried to feed urea versus peptides at different doses and
then it just didn't work at all. And that one still actually keeps me up because I really expected
that when we, when we fed a better protein source that we would get a better response and we
didn't and then we had a quadratic response and why did the mid grade do what it did.
All this to go back and say if I focus on multiple protein sources and I hit that RDP in the tens,
I'm going to hit a spot where my, at least in the models and I believe it to be true,
my microbial protein as a percent of total MP breaks over 60. And what scares me about the sheep
is I know that the sheep that you balance diets for or goats, I can hit a, of my bacterial
percentage at 65, right? It's almost a 70% microbial protein is the system efficient.
The sheep is, the room in is really efficient, right, at all that recycling and I can make the cow
that efficient. But the cow also represents, you know, this overhead that Norman would always
push us to think about and we have to maximize production because we got the lights on and we got
the milk and machines and we got the later room, we got the trucks and and I don't know what our
target is, but we have to probably settle on some sort of a target. What percentage of the diet
should be MP from bacteria before we start supplementing our bypass amino acids. And that's really
maybe the question I would spit back. My number when I meet with people is 55%. If I'm over 55%,
I probably left something on the table with bypass amino acids. If I'm under 55, I probably have
work to do to improve my room in nitrogen efficiency. Yeah, yeah, I love that way of looking at it
because it really pairs like the whole...
system. We say what we're trying to do, the real utility of a ruminant of a dairy cow.
Yeah, and as a minor acid person, I always think about that digestible minor acid profile.
Also, if you are putting, if too much of that MP is coming from microbial, how much
play do you then have with adjusting that digestible profile because we can't, yeah, the microbial
protein brings the non-essentials, which, yeah, they need some of those as well, but you
just have less space to then play with your essential minor acids, talking about what
I mentioned today about the digestible profile, meeting or matching that of casing, and that's
what you can do with your RUP. And then all of a sudden, now you're feeding way more
total group protein than you need if you're trying to hit all those targets. So, yeah.
And in related to that, when I was listening to you talk about the isolucine,
lucine and valine, right? And that group two, if I'm going to call it that, and I've got
my group three, what really hit me was that my microbial protein is not balanced, right?
Microbial protein is not ideal to hit those targets that you threw out, because I'm going
to be short, methionine, and my group one. So, I'm going to probably need to supplement
some of that regardless of how I maximize. And then if I get into my group two, my
lucine and lysine should be really high, well, lysine is group two, right? Lucine is group
three. Lucine, those are all, they're all group two, group three be the non-essentials
by like conventions. Okay. And so then my isolucine, though, is going to be kind of on the
low side, right? And I think you threw up a couple of options of how to try to push some
isolucine into that system, because that's the one when I go to balance it in the model
right now. It's really hard to come up with isolucine. So, if there's ideas from the
group about how to hit an isolucine number, or maybe you guys are going to bring that
room and protect it and isolucine, that would be ideal, right? Yeah. But my understanding
is it's pretty hard to come by. Yeah. I think it is. And the, I guess the characterization
of those ingredients that we're feeding on the, what are they providing on a digestible
amino acid supply? How does, you know, is there any capacity to influence the amino acid
profile of microbial protein? That's maybe like a whole other box we could get into. But
yeah, it's a challenge. We, in theory, when we do these infusion models and we provide
the, my essential amino acids in the profile of casing, we get these wild, marginal protein
efficiencies. So if we could do that, that would be a very efficient way to use our, our
UP fraction of the, of the, of the diet. But yeah, we're, we're limited currently in our
ability to do that from the raw materials we have, from the room and protected resources
that we have. But I don't think it's impossible given kind of where technology is going and
more awareness around, around this. And, and I would push it back to that into the table
with a question related to efficiencies and energy. And the two of you proceeded each
other, right? You, you both back to back with presentations. And I saw different grams
per megacall of energy recommendations from both of you. And I would be curious and
perspective on where they both in our C or C, I know, Jonas is what C and CPS driven,
were they different because of the different systems? Are they different because of the
way that we think about optimizing differently versus maximizing and just curious the take
from, from that into the table about that.
Yeah. Well, I think the numbers that Cali put in are the numbers that Cornell is recommending
right, like basically the Van Amber paper. The numbers we put in, you know, are more
like what a technical team thinks it should be. So our targets for metinding, lysine and
histidine are different than what Cornell, you have to consider the way the Cornell derivate
those equations using non-linear approach, right? And try to solve for the third derivative.
So what they're doing is what's the maximum response that you can get. It doesn't mean
that's the most economical response, right? And as we go into response and not requirements
where we should go, that's kind of I think where the numbers I come from. So I think the
number needs to be revisit, you know, based on economics as well, right? Right now, if
we are going to get on this wave that the world need more protein and protein is, you
know, when we're going to have to push more protein, yeah, maybe we should push those amino
acids if economically, you know, to the maximum side of the curve. But I think that's the
optimization that you need to do. So I think those are where the discrepancy of the numbers
may become from, you know, like I would say it's very hard for me to see really people
in the field heating exactly those numbers. And you and I think had this discussion, if
you go and try to heat all of them, you can't do it, you know, or, you know, you're going
to have to open another bank account, you know, just to fund that, right? So, yeah, so
I think the knowledge there is is is you know, I think the recommendations make sense in
terms of, I agree with Kelly in terms of, I think you need to consider the energy piece,
right? And I think what I tried to say on some of my talk is if you're going to balance
for amino acid, make sure you have covered the energy first, right? So that's I think
is a principle. Sometimes I think we go do this research or even try on farm application
of amino acid balance in your lactation and not even correct energy. And you don't get
the results you're expecting, right? And you know, protein synthesis is a very energy-driven
process. So you do need the energy, right? So, but I think I think that's where the discrepancy
is on the data, right? And you know, just the way we're expressing, right? Maybe more economically
versus theoretically numbers, right? But I do have a question for you, you know, since we are
back and forth on questions, right? Really interesting with the paper that you into Hackman had in
Georgia science. Oh, sure. And I think it ties up with this efficiency, you know? And I have a
very, very easy question for you, you know, and you can answer in 30 seconds. Why do,
why it appears that bugs grow inefficiently? Why we can't really move about their theoretical
growth. They are growing between one third and two third of the theoretical growth. So you're
just asking mostly about energy spilling, right? Yeah. And and this is where we were talking,
I would personally, I'm biased, obviously, but love to see you and Tim collaborating,
because I think you can bring that microbiology and that systemic nutrient piece together.
Of what he listened to. Well, yeah. So I'll send him a link and I'll make sure.
Yeah. No, I think when what was really interesting about that paper, of course, is that when they
were grown on the pure cellulose or the glucose, they grew at the same efficiency, but not an
efficiency of, you know, optimum or one or even close. And I think this just gets back to
a basic biological rule that I try to impart to kids when I'm working with them is that nature is
selfish, right? So in the same way in microbiology, the microbes are selfish. And in their selfishness,
they waste energy, right? So they're always trying to grow and outcompete. One of the things that I
learned from furcans probably too late in my time there is that they'll even build up sugar and
then deposit it on the outside of the cells, right? So extracellular matrices of energy. So it'll show
up as there was poor starch digestibility when in reality, it was digested and then rebuilt and
stored in their own competitive matrix is what they're trying to do. So microbes are are breaking
things down and then hiding them away from their competitors and they would rather run a cycle
to degrade things and burn it than to allow their competitors to get nested a little buggers.
Well, and if you can draw whatever correlation you want to, human society, nature is selfish, right?
So basically you need to come off a GLP drug for the bugs, you know, so they don't run these
inefficient cycles and that's the way to do that. Yeah, yeah, or and I think that's why sometimes we
see these room and modifiers have some effect that's maybe unexpected and you know, one of the
probably the things I was the most skeptic about 10 years ago and less skeptic now is essential oils
and the way that essential oils can disrupt membranes and some of that I learned just with the
palmitic fatty acid story over the last few years, right? And how we've we've been reading about
palmitic fatty acid and how I can infiltrate membranes or be used as energy and microbes in the way
they respond. But if you'd asked me 10 years ago if I thought that fat would improve fiber digestibility,
I'd probably get laughed out of a room in 2016. I think it happened to me once. Yeah, and so
in the same way now, I think you have these room and modifiers that could be affecting microbial
membranes or their efficiency or their maybe their their drive for degradation or fermentation,
but actually sometimes when we negatively impact a microbial population, we make them more efficient.
If we don't kill them off, and I think that's kind of what I was driving out with that protein
degradation question afterwards, but that would assume that the protein you fed in the first place
is good, right? If you prevent it from being broken down, it better not be because I was joking
with Jonas, it better not be distillers grain protein entirely, right? It serves its own purpose,
but I don't want that to be 100% of my RUP. So yeah, I think we can with what we're developing from
a genomic standpoint, the database that we're building. I say we, not me, I barely know how to
read it, let alone generate it, but what we're developing from a genomic understanding of bacteria,
I think we can design kind of designer feed additives in the next generation that we can use to target
specific bad actors, and not kill them off, but just limit them a little bit and protozoa, a great
example, everybody wanted to nuke them and wipe them off the face of the planet, but the reality is
that they serve positive purposes if we can hold them back a little bit from being too wasteful.
Yeah. Do you think there's opportunity there to actually manipulate the amino acid profile of
microbial protein and like make that more ideal? Because that's where my brain goes first as a
post absorptive amino acid person. I think the potential capacity there would be huge.
The amino acid balance, the amino acid composition of microbial membranes varies by species.
I think the answer is yes. In first, I was reading about fatty acids.
That's the same thing. If you want to take a deep dive, I've got a spare copy of
Hunggates book, I can mail it to you, and it's quite a read. It's a fresh up, so.
If you read through there, you'll see so many times we see things that we probably should have known,
but we forgot 20 or 30 years ago, or we didn't believe it because it was sheep's study instead of
a cow study, so we got to rerun it. I think in that book, the first thing that struck me was
actually the fatty acid membrane composition, and we had this big resurgence in the 20 teens about
fatty acid composition, and I thought, oh, wow, this is really cool. I can feed different fats and
shift the microbial fatty acid composition, and then you go back and Hunggates book and
they already knew that in the 60s, right? Maybe the 70s. I think if you can do that for fats,
you can do that for amino acids, too. Whether or not you can get the ones you actually want.
But even just the idea that back then, it might not have even been a relevant question,
right? If we weren't so concerned about the efficiency of it all, why would that stand out?
But now we're pushing and finding every squeezing out every drop we can, and now all of a sudden,
that's something that for 30 years we've been working on it, but back then, no one would have
really, it wouldn't have jumped out to anybody. But now, sort of the next frontier of where can we
find those opportunities for efficiency? Yeah, I think it's super interesting.
So on the third part of your presentation, you went on, you know, probably your favorite topic,
you know, memory flexibility and all that. For me, it was very interesting. I have a,
remember I work for a chicken company, right? So, you know, sometimes you sit with them and
chicken, so you have so much available amino acids and you're okay, you want more of these,
you can just add, right? But I guess my question is like, for example, some other,
terms of your branch chain amino acids, you eyes are losing, valine, and losing.
Eyes are losing, I agree if you're as a pain, you know, like in terms of ingredients that we
have available, how do we really change our losing? Losing corn protein, great source, right?
Vailing, you know, very by ingredients as well. When you did some of your work and most of the work
I've seen, you know, usually feed those branch chains and raise you all together, right? Is that
one that's more important or you're just trying to hit all of them, you know? So, or, you know,
should we really focus on the eyes of losing or, you know, in a way, valine, and losing kind of
do the job, you know, just, yeah. I think there's quite a bit of the, from the, how to answer,
from the nitrogen and carbon balance in the memory gland and how it's used for
making what it needs to make milk protein, I suspect there's quite some interchange there,
but we also do know from work, I haven't done the individual amino acid infusion work,
but the work from Marcanigan, Peter Yoder, they've done more looking at individual amino acids and
losing certainly even, you know, from outside of just milk protein synthesis, but we know how
stimulatory it is for mTOR, in muscle, in memory gland, all the things. So, from a signaling standpoint,
losing is super important. From a precursors for milk protein synthesis, I suspect that there
is some interchange there, same thing with arginine-3inine lysine. If you put those all together,
there's probably a lot of flexibility. If you, I do still think if you favor one or a few over the
others too much, there might be some, because you have to also think of the transporters coming into
cells, potentially some competition there, which there's been some work looking at that.
So, that would be something to look to if you're getting really heavily biased towards one or the
other, how if that could really happen and-
practice when you're feeding, you're never isolating the supply of one so much when you feed.
You see that more with the infusion work where we're feeding super low crude protein and
so much of it's coming from infused amino acids.
But yeah, I think that there's from a mild protein synthesis, standpoint, nitrogen and
carbon.
There's probably a lot of flexibility from the signaling of the protein synthesis pathway.
Lucene seems to have quite a bit of an impact.
Are you going to affect, okay?
Yeah.
That's great news because I can get a lot of that one in microbial protein.
Yeah.
There you go.
That's good.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So Kelly, I think implied in the title of your talk, nitrogen efficiency implications for
sustainable dairy nutrition, how would you characterize where we are today relative to nitrogen
efficiency?
Where do we want to go?
And then how would you prioritize your strategies in getting us there?
I don't think I'm old enough to answer that question.
I've been doing this long enough.
No, I think how I would respond to that, maybe this is a bit biased from just my experience
so far in my career, but I would like to be able to say that perhaps the North American
picture is going to start maybe putting more emphasis on the environmental sustainability
side.
And that's not necessarily from what comes out under the tail of the cow, but also simply
from the resources available, the pressures, whether that's economic or social pressures
around agriculture in general.
So I do think the conversation is starting to shift.
Again, that might be a bias because I currently live in California, but let's see how that
translates to the rest of the country with that sort of northwestern experience as an
example.
So I guess I would say that we've made big improvements, I think, sometimes you look
at what we're looking a bit of what we were just saying about the microbial cell membranes
and things.
Things that in theory were written in books 30 years ago.
Now we're looking at that thinking, wow, what an opportunity.
We just never needed to see it as an opportunity before.
So I think that's a really positive outlook.
It's great job security.
We have a lot of work to do.
And yeah, we can always keep improving that flexibility in our room and it's what can't
we put into them and see what happens.
So I think the outlook is bright.
If we keep going down that path, we've come a long way and there's always more to do.
But yeah, on the sustainability side, I think the conversation is shifting.
Yeah, let's see where that goes.
Did you say we're at a five on a scale one to ten today and I'm just kind of curious,
you know, how much runway is there in a dairy cow for improving efficiency?
Yeah, I mean, I'll call out an exercise done by one of my PhD advisors, Jan Dijkstra,
who says that the maximum protein efficiency or maximum nitrogen efficiency of a dairy
cow is I think it's 43% based on some calculations that he did not with some years ago.
Yeah, I wouldn't trust anyone as much as I trust Jan to make those types of calculations.
So and where are we sitting now on commercial farms in around the US?
I'm not even 100% sure again, like what those numbers would be.
But I would say we're probably at least 10% below that.
And again, that maximal theoretical efficiency, it is just that it's theoretical.
So if we're target, we're not probably not over targeting 43%.
So are we out of five or are we at a six?
I think it's just so variable across operations.
And again, how you define efficiency.
Right.
Yeah, you could be having some impact on relatively more impact on nitrogen
excretion, but you're doing that from a place of really truly upcycling nutrients
that would be creating perhaps bigger problems if they were in a landfill.
So it's a really hard one to fully find a balance on.
Yeah.
It's more of a life cycle assessment kind of a thing.
Yeah, and yeah.
Great conversation so far.
Any big rocks that we've not unearthed yet?
Tonight's last call question is brought to you by Nitrusher, Precision Release Nitrogen.
Nitrusher delivers a complete TMR for the room in microbiome, helping you feed the microbes
that feed your cows.
To learn more about maximizing microbial protein output while reducing your carbon footprint,
visit balcum.com slash Nitrusher.
Well, Kelly, I was curious in your big picture perspective, we talked about collaborating
with Tim, for example, and he does a lot more in vitro work.
How do you see as you move forward in this nitrogen efficiency discussion and you have
this physiological, you know, whole cow experience?
How do you attack that?
How do you balance your in vitro needs with your in vivo needs?
Like what are the next big, big hurdles or the, you know, you're kind of a USDA panel
now.
That's what I'm hearing.
Yeah, why not?
What?
He's asking like a USDA panel, you know, like the fender, the fender, the fender, your
line of work.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, I just curious, you know, if you think forward in your vision, what's the hurdle?
Do you have the models that you need?
Do we need other research models to address what you're after?
Are you able to measure today what you need to measure in order to advance or do you not
even have the tools maybe yet to do that?
Yeah, I think we're at an interesting point with some of the like big omics, like I don't
know how to do it.
I don't know how to read it, just like what you said, but those that do, I think are at
a good spot because that cracks open a lot of things that maybe we couldn't access
before on the microbial side and being able to maybe do things in vivo, but less invasively
than we maybe had to do them in the past.
Personally, I'd also like to do a lot more with isotope work.
So of course, I talked about the urea recycling work, but then even on the amino acid side,
I think if we can get other than the fact, some of them are super expensive, but if we
can get creative with looking at that quantitatively and being creative with isotope use, how can
we get more information about this sort of black box of post-absorptive metabolism
and understand, and then like I foresee very practical feeding studies that represent
what's being done in certain regions or if we can come to these kind of typical diets
for certain regions, things like that, and really look at, okay, what are the amino acid
efficiencies under these conditions that are actually practical?
I'm not infusing anything, just cows are eating, but we're also able to put them maybe
in individual housing for a couple of days, put some isotope in them, really measure those
fluxes, and then put them back out and run that through bigger groups of cows, and really
try to match the practical conditions as much as possible, at least in terms of diet,
with starting to understand where are these things going to just have a better picture?
That's, I don't know if that answers your question, but that's kind of where I would like
to see these things go, not just in vitro or really intensive in vivo for metabolism work,
how can we, like I started doing that even in my PhD, doing mammary gland net balances
on cows in free stalls, like 60 cows, it was insane, but yeah, no one was doing that,
and it gives you sometimes kind of weird data, but it's real, it's not cows and tie stalls
being infused and five animals, you know?
So how can we start to get some of these, be creative, get some more metabolic data under
relatively practical dietary and management conditions?
I think that's what, you know, answers the questions of the producers and the nutritionists
and the consultants in the room, you stand up here and present, and they have all these
questions, and then you think, oh yeah, that's actually what you need to know to be able
to apply any of this that I just said, so I'd like to be able to get there.
Well, and there was this chart today that really struck me with the groundwater contamination,
right?
And it got me thinking after you and I spoke and after lunch, what's the lifetime of
nitrate or other nitrogen poised, you know, toxicity, contamination of groundwater?
How many years does it take for this to, we fix our game today, and we're 98% efficient,
you know?
Yeah, yeah, that's a question I can't answer, luckily I'm now sitting with a bunch of
really excellent kind of nutrient management on the environmental side at UC Davis, and
that's another aspect of do we have all the tools we need to really assess the impact
of changes that we're putting so much pressure on, nutritionists to do now, and all these
new targets, can we turn around and say it's really going to have X, Y, or Z impact?
And I think that's another to your previous question, perhaps we should start looking at
that a bit more on the system side and considering the impacts of feeding on, yeah, what's happening
with, I mean, nitrogen is so difficult because it can go so many places, it's actually
a much more challenging thing to handle than methane ever will be, because of that reason.
So yeah, I don't have a good answer to that specific question, but I think that that's
also going to be important if I'm going to stand up, if we're going to stand up there
and show these figures, having some, what is the value of making these changes in
formulations on ultimately that environmental impact?
Well, and I think that you kind of read where I was going with this, you know, we know
the lifetime of methane, for example, is much shorter than CO2, but we've kind of hyperfixated
on methane until recently.
And coming from someone who, you know, our company makes some money selling a methane inhibitor
historically, but I think big picture does the methane problem concern you or is this
water contamination maybe actually truly a bigger problem, because, you know, which is
going to kill me first, right, like, bad water, or an extra degree.
Yeah, well, and from the dairy farm perspective too, like we have farms in the central valley
who have to pay for bottled water for surrounding communities, not because they're malicious
and want to pollute with nitrate, but that's just the reality of that region.
So I would say that probably from a farm standpoint, they're going to be more concerned about
that aspect on their, on their bottom line versus, yeah, the methane that they're emitting.
I mean, they're usually doing a pretty good job of capturing that as well, but yeah, I'm
biased, but the nitrogen side concerns me more.
So then why have we done such a poor job, you know, like from an awareness standpoint,
yeah, you go and talk about to go to grocery store and ask people about, they talk about
methane, right?
So how have we missed or like what, what are we doing wrong that we have focused so much
on the thing that in your biased opinion, which is great, is, is not the bigger problem?
Yeah.
That's a good one.
I don't know.
I think part of it is because it's, I think it's a more challenging story to tell because
it can go so many places and it, it's contributed by so many places, even on the, even on the
carbon side, you know, agriculture gets this bad rep, but actually there's a lot of contributors
to carbon pollution, whether that's methane or other or CO2, it is the same for nitrogen.
So those figures I showed, that's, that's not only because of, of agricultural pollution,
it's other things as well.
So the same thing is true, and I don't know why it's been kind of like flying under the
radar.
So you don't know, certainly in, in the Netherlands, for example, it has not been flying under
the radar since like before I was born, it's always been a discussion.
So why here is it just, it's been more of a slow role, it's, it's never, never come
to such a head.
I mean in California, it is starting to come to a head now.
So that might change it might just have taken so much longer for it to become to a point
that now regulators are really concerned, legislators are really concerned and they can't
ignore it again, depending on the region.
So we'll see.
It seems to me like several years ago that nitrogen, phosphorus, those kinds of things were
a lot bigger conversation, and now we're talking about climate change, and now it's all
about carbon, and so maybe there's just not enough oxygen in the room to be able to talk
about nitrogen.
I'm going to suck one.
You're going cycles, right?
And then we come back.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Let's spend a while since the lake in Ohio turned green.
That's right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Very good.
Listen, this has been a great conversation.
I really appreciate it.
Thank you for joining in person this time.
Yeah.
We'll certainly have you back.
This is a subject that's not going to go away.
We're going to be learning a lot more about it and a lot more research in the future.
So looking forward to having you back, Jonas.
Thank you for joining us.
Thank you.
Ben, you're an amazing guest.
We're going to have you back, dude.
I appreciate what you did today.
Lots of fun.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you for joining us as well.
Hope you learned something.
Hope you had some fun.
Hope to see you next time here at Real Science Exchange, where it's always happy hour.
And you're always among friends.
We'd love to hear your comments or ideas for topics and guests.
So please reach out via email at anh.marketing at bellchem.com with any suggestions.
And we'll work hard to add them to the schedule.
Don't forget to leave a five-star rating on your way out.
You can request your Real Science Exchange t-shirt in just a few easy steps.
Just like or subscribe to the Real Science Exchange and send us a screenshot along with
your address and t-shirt size to anh.marketing at bellchem.com.
Bellchem's Real Science Lecture series of webinars takes place on the first Tuesday of
every month with the top research and nutrition topics that will impact your business.
We also include small ruminant, monogastric, and companion animal-focused topics throughout
the year.
Visit bellchem.com slash Real Science to see the upcoming topics and to register for
future webinars.
You can also access past webinars and search for the topics most important to you.
